The statements in this report include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations.
These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date hereof or as of the dates indicated in the statements and should not be relied upon as predictions of future events, as we cannot assure you that the events or circumstances reflected in these statements will be achieved or will occur.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward-looking terminology including “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “pro forma,” “estimates,” “anticipates,” or the negative of these words and phrases, other variations of these words and phrases or comparable terminology.
The forward- looking statements relate to, among other things: demand for AMD’s products; the growth, change and competitive landscape of the markets in which AMD participates; future restructuring activities; the nature and extent of AMD’s future payments to GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF) and the materiality of these payments; the materiality of AMD’s future purchases from GF; sales patterns of AMD’s semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products; AMD’s expected completion of its restructuring plan announced in October 2015 (the 2015 Restructuring Plan) and the anticipated cash payments and savings from the 2015 Restructuring Plan; statements regarding the proposed joint ventures (the JVs) between AMD and Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics, Co., Ltd., including the JVs’ expected future performance (including expected results of operations and financial guidance); benefits from the proposed JVs; the JVs’ future financial condition, operating results, strategy and plans; statements about regulatory and other approvals; the closing date for the proposed transaction; AMD's expected future filing of patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions; AMD's expectation that based on the information presently known to management, the securities class action and the shareholder derivative suit will not have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, cash flows or results of operations; the expected completion of AMD's exit from its dense server business; the level of international sales as compared to total sales; that AMD does not expect to reduce its unrecognized tax benefits in the next 12 months; that other unrecognized tax benefits will not materially change in the next 12 months; that AMD’s cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, the savings from its restructuring plans and the secured revolving line of credit (Secured Revolving Line of Credit) will be sufficient to fund AMD’s operations including capital expenditures over the next 12 months; AMD’s ability to obtain sufficient external financing on favorable terms, or at all; its dependence on a small number of customers for a substantial part of its revenue; its hedging strategy; its expenditures related to environmental compliance and conflict minerals disclosure requirements; and AMD does not expect to pay dividends in the future.
Material factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, without limitation, the following: Intel Corporation’s dominance of the microprocessor market and its aggressive business practices may limit AMD’s ability to compete effectively; AMD relies on GF to manufacture all of its microprocessor and APU products and a certain portion of its GPU products, with limited exceptions.
If GF is not able to satisfy AMD’s manufacturing requirements, its business could be adversely impacted; AMD relies on third parties to manufacture its products, and if they are unable to do so on a timely basis in sufficient quantities and using competitive technologies, AMD’s business could be materially adversely affected; failure to achieve expected manufacturing yields for AMD’s products could negatively impact its financial results; the success of AMD’s business is dependent upon its ability to introduce products on a timely basis with features and performance levels that provide value to its customers while supporting and coinciding with significant industry transitions; if AMD cannot generate sufficient revenue and operating cash flow or obtain external financing, it may face a cash shortfall and be unable to make all of its planned investments in research and development or other strategic investments; the loss of a significant customer may have a material adverse effect on AMD; global economic uncertainty may adversely impact AMD’s business and operating results; AMD may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service its debt obligations or meet its working capital requirements; AMD has a substantial amount of indebtedness which could adversely affect its financial position and prevent it from implementing its strategy or fulfilling its contractual obligations; the agreements governing AMD’s notes and the Secured Revolving Line of Credit impose restrictions on AMD that may adversely affect its ability to operate its business; the completion and impact of the 2015 Restructuring Plan, its transformation initiatives and any future restructuring actions could adversely affect it; the markets in which AMD’s products are sold are highly competitive; uncertainties involving the ordering and shipment of AMD’s products could materially adversely affect it; AMD’s receipt of revenue from its semi-custom SoC products is dependent upon its technology being designed into third-party products and the success of those products; the demand for AMD’s products depends in part on the market conditions in the industries into which they are sold.
Fluctuations in demand for AMD’s products or a market decline in any of these industries could have a material adverse effect on its results of operations; AMD’s ability to design and introduce new products in a timely manner is dependent upon third-party intellectual property; AMD depends on third-party companies for the design, manufacture and supply of motherboards and other computer platform components to support its business; if AMD loses Microsoft Corporation’s support for its products or other software vend ors do not design and develop software to run on AMD’s products, its ability to sell its products could be materially adversely affected; AMD’s reliance on third-party distributors and AIB partners subjects it to certain risks; AMD’s inability to continue to attract and retain qualified personnel may hinder its product development programs; in the event of a change of control, AMD may not be able to repurchase its outstanding debt as required by the applicable indentures and its Secured Revolving Line of Credit, which would result in a default under the indentures and its Secured Revolving Line of Credit; the semiconductor industry is highly cyclical and has experienced severe downturns that have materially adversely affected, and may continue to materially adversely affect its business in the future; acquisitions, divestitures and/or joint ventures could disrupt its business, harm its financial condition and operating results or dilute, or adversely affect the price of its common stock; AMD’s business is dependent upon the proper functioning of its internal business processes and information systems and modification or interruption of such systems may disrupt its business, processes and internal controls; data breaches and cyber-attacks could compromise AMD’s intellectual property or other sensitive information, be costly to remediate and cause significant damage to its business and reputation; AMD’s operating results are subject to quarterly and seasonal sales patterns; if essential equipment, materials or manufacturing processes are not available to manufacture its products, AMD could be materially adversely affected; if AMD’s products are not compatible with some or all industry-standard software and hardware, it could be materially adversely affected; costs related to defective products could have a material adverse effect on AMD; if AMD fails to maintain the efficiency of its supply chain as it responds to changes in customer demand for its products, its business could be materially adversely affected; AMD outsources to third parties certain supply-chain logistics functions, including portions of its product distribution, transportation management and information technology support services; AMD may incur future impairments of goodwill; AMD’s worldwide operations are subject to political, legal and economic risks and natural disasters, which could have a material adverse effect on it; worldwide political conditions may adversely affect demand for AMD’s products; unfavorable currency exchange rate fluctuations could adversely affect AMD; AMD’s inability to effectively control the sales of its products on the gray market could have a material adverse effect on it; if AMD cannot adequately protect its technology or other intellectual property in the United States and abroad, through patents, copyrights, trade secrets, trademarks and other measures, it may lose a competitive advantage and incur significant expenses; AMD may not be able to successfully monetize its intellectual property; AMD is a party to litigation and may become a party to other claims or litigation that could cause it to incur substantial costs or pay substantial damages or prohibit it from selling its products; AMD’s business is subject to potential tax liabilities; a variety of environmental laws that AMD is subject to could result in additional costs and liabilities; and higher health care costs and labor costs could adversely affect AMD’s business.
For a discussion of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, see “Part I, Item 1A-Risk Factors” and the “Financial Condition” section set forth in “Part II, Item 7-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A, beginning on page 35 below and such other risks and uncertainties as set forth below in this report or detailed in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports and filings.
We assume no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
We are a global semiconductor company primarily offering: x86 microprocessors, as a standalone central processing unit (CPU) or as incorporated into an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, and discrete graphics processing units (GPUs) for the consumer, commercial and professional graphics markets; and server and embedded CPUs, GPUs and APUs, and semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products and technology for game consoles.
For financial information about geographic areas and for segment information with respect to revenues and operating results, refer to the information set forth in Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements, beginning on page 82 below.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in December.
The years endedDecember 26, 2015, December 27, 2014 and December 28, 2013 each included 52 weeks.
References in this report to 2015, 2014 and 2013 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. (AMD) was incorporated under the laws of Delaware on May 1, 1969 and became a publicly held company in 1972.
Our common stock is currently listed on The NASDAQ Stock Market (NASDAQ) under the symbol “AMD”.
Our mailing address and executive offices are located at One AMD Place, Sunnyvale, California 94088, and our telephone number is (408) 749-4000.
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, AMD Athlon, AMD Opteron, AMD Phenom, AMD Sempron, AMD Turion, FirePro, CrossFire, Radeon, Geode, SeaMicro and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Microsoft, Windows, Xbox360 and Xbox One are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other jurisdictions.
PlayStation is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Wii and Wii U are registered trademarks of Nintendo of America, Inc.
ARM is a registered trademark of ARM Limited (or its subsidiaries).
Other names are for informational purposes only and are used to identify companies and products and may be trademarks of their respective owners.
On the Investor Relations pages of our Web site, http://ir.amd.com, we post links to our filings with the SEC, our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Ethics for our executive officers and all other senior finance executives, our Worldwide Standards of Business Conduct, which applies to our Board of Directors and all of our employees, and the charters of the Audit and Finance, Compensation and Leadership Resources, Nominating and Corporate Governance and Innovation and Technology committees of our Board of Directors.
Our filings with the SEC are posted as soon as reasonably practical after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
You can also obtain copies of these documents by writing to us at: Corporate Secretary, AMD, 7171 Southwest Parkway, M/S B100.2, Austin, Texas 78735, or emailing us at: Corporate.Secretary@amd.com.
All of these documents and filings are available free of charge.
If we make substantive amendments to our Code of Ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller or persons performing similar functions, we intend to disclose the nature of such amendment or waiver on our Web site.
The information contained on our Web site is not incorporated by reference in, or considered to be a part of, this report.
We are a global semiconductor company.
Semiconductors are components used in a variety of electronic products and systems.
An integrated circuit (IC) is a semiconductor device that consists of many interconnected transistors on a single chip.
Since the invention of the transistor in 1948, improvements in IC process and design technologies have led to the development of smaller, more complex and more reliable ICs at a lower cost-per-function.
Developments in IC design and manufacturing process technologies have resulted in significant advances in microprocessor performance.
As businesses and consumers require greater performance from their computer systems due to the growth of digital data and increasingly sophisticated software applications, semiconductor companies are designing and developing multi-core microprocessors, where multiple processor cores are placed on a single die or in a single processor.
Multi-core microprocessors offer enhanced overall system performance and efficiency because computing tasks can be spread across two or more processing cores, each of which can execute a task at full speed.
Multi-core microprocessors can increase performance of a computer system without greatly increasing the total amount of power consumed and the total amount of heat emitted.
Businesses and consumers also require computer systems with improved power management technology, which helps them to reduce the power consumption of their computer systems, enable smaller and more portable form factors, and lower total cost of ownership.
An APU is a processing unit that integrates a CPU and a GPU onto one chip (or one piece of silicon), along with, in some cases, other special-purpose components.
This integration enhances system performance by “offloading” selected tasks to the best-suited component (i.e., the CPU or the GPU) to optimize component use, increasing the speed of data flow between the CPU and GPU through shared memory and allowing the GPU to function as both a graphics engine and an application accelerator.
Having the CPU and GPU on the same chip also typically improves energy efficiency by, for example, eliminating connections between discrete chips.
A SoC is a type of IC with a CPU, GPU and other components, such as a memory controller and peripheral management, comprising a complete computing system on a single chip.
By combining all of these elements as a SoC, system performance and energy efficiency is improved, similar to an APU.
Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA) describes an industry standard that is an overarching design for having combinations of CPU and GPU processor cores operate as a unified, integrated engine that shares system responsibilities and resources.
We are a founding member of the HSA Foundation, a non-profit organization established to define and promote this open standards-based approach to heterogeneous computing.
Heterogeneous computing allows for the elevation of the GPU to the same level of the CPU for memory access, queuing and execution - a true “compute core”.
This capability allows software programmers to develop applications to more fully utilize the capabilities of the graphics compute core.
In addition to graphics processing, the parallel operation of GPUs are used on multiple sets of data, increasingly used in vector processor for non-graphics applications that require repetitive computations such as supercomputing, deep neural networks, and various embedded applications.
Our microprocessors are incorporated into computing platforms, which are a collection of technologies that are designed to work together to provide a more complete computing solution and to enable and advance the computing components.
We believe that integrated, balanced computing platforms consisting of microprocessors, chipsets and GPUs (either as discrete GPUs or integrated into an APU or SoC) that work together at the system level bring end users improved system stability, increased performance and enhanced power efficiency.
In addition, we believe our customers also benefit from an all-AMD platform (consisting of an APU or CPU, a discrete GPU and a chipset or an AMD Fusion Controller Hub chip), as we are able to optimize interoperability, provide our customers a single point of contact for the key platform components and enable them to bring the platforms to market faster in a variety of client and server system form factors.
We currently base our microprocessors and chipsets on the x86 instruction set architecture and AMD’s Direct Connect Architecture, which connects an on-chip memory controller and input/output (I/O) channels directly to one or more microprocessor cores.
We typically integrate two or more processor cores onto a single die, and each core has its own dedicated cache, which is memory that is located on the semiconductor die, permitting quick access to frequently used data and instructions.
Some of our microprocessors have additional levels of cache such as L2, or second-level cache, and L3, or third-level cache, to enable faster data access and higher performance.
We focus on continually improving the energy efficiency of our products through our design principles and innovations in power management technology.
To that end, we offer CPUs, GPUs, APUs, SoCs and chipsets with multiple low power states that are designed to utilize lower clock speeds and voltages to reduce processor power consumption during active and idle times.
The use of intelligent, dynamic power management is designed to create lower energy use by allowing compute applications to be completed quickly and efficiently, enabling a return to the ultra-low power idle state.
Our APUs for desktop PCs consist primarily of the AMD A-Series and AMD E-Series APUs.
We also offer AMD FX CPUs for the enthusiast market.
The latest generation of our AMD FX CPUs is based on the “Piledriver” x86 multi-core architecture.
Our AMD FX CPUs are designed for multitasking, high resolution gaming and HD media processing and come in eight-, six- and quad-core versions.
In May 2015, we introduced the AMD A-Series A10-7870K APU, a refresh to the existing line of processors, formerly codenamed “Kaveri”, designed to support best-in-class experiences for eSports and online gaming.
In July 2015, we introduced the AMD A-Series A8-7670K APU, designed to support Windows® 10, mainstream workloads and online gaming.
In response to consumer demand, we continue to invest in designing and developing high performing and low power APUs for notebook PC platforms.
Our APUs for notebook PCs consist primarily of AMD A-Series APUs and AMD E-Series APUs.
These APUs combine discrete-level AMD Radeon™ graphics, and multi-core CPU processors on a single chip and are designed to optimize performance and energy efficiency.
In May 2015, we introduced the AMD 7000 Series APUs, formerly codenamed “Carrizo-L”, designed to prolong battery life and enable uninterrupted video streaming in mainstream notebooks.
In June 2015, we announced our 6th Generation A-Series Processor, formerly codenamed “Carrizo”, the world’s first high-performance APU in a SoC design.
Leveraging AMD “Excavator” cores and the third generation of AMD’s Graphics Core Next (GCN) architecture, the processor is designed for mainstream notebooks.
We offer enterprise-class solutions sold as AMD PRO for the commercial client market.
AMD PRO solutions are designed to provide commercial- grade quality, platform longevity and extended image stability, and also include security and manageability features for enterprise.
In September 2015, we launched the latest AMD PRO mobile and desktop processors, formerly codenamed "Carrizo PRO" and "Godavari PRO", based on our 6th Generation A-Series Processor technology.
The semiconductor graphics market addresses the need for improved visual processing in various computing devices.
Many consumers value a rich visual experience to enable a more compelling and immersive experience, and, for these consumers, the PC has evolved from a traditional data processing and communications device to an entertainment platform.
As a result, visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key product differentiation elements among computing devices.
This has led to increasing creation and use of processing-intensive multimedia content for computing devices, including playing games, capturing multimedia content, viewing online videos, photo editing and managing digital content.
In turn, these trends have contributed to higher consumer demand for performance graphics solutions and to manufacturers designing computing devices with these capabilities.
Our APUs deliver visual processing functionality for value and mainstream PCs by integrating a CPU and a GPU on a single chip, while discrete GPUs (which are also known as dGPUs) offer high performance graphics processing across AMD platforms.
AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing or GPGPU (General Purpose GPU) refers to a set of advanced hardware and software technologies that enable discrete AMD GPUs, working in concert with the CPU, to accelerate computational tasks beyond traditional CPU processing by utilizing the vast number of discrete GPU cores while working with the CPU to process information cooperatively.
In addition, computing devices with HSA features run computationally-intensive tasks more efficiently, which we believe provides a superior application experience to the end user.
Moreover, heterogeneous computing allows for the elevation of the GPU to the same level as the CPU for memory access, queuing and execution.
Graphics is a fundamental component of almost everything we create and can be found in an APU, GPU, SoC or a combination of a GPU with one of the other foregoing products working in tandem.
Our customers generally use our graphics solutions to increase the speed of rendering images and to help improve image resolution and color definition.
We develop our graphics products for use in various computing devices and entertainment platforms, including desktop PCs, notebook PCs, 2-in-1s and professional workstations.
With each of our graphics products, we have available drivers and supporting software packages that enable the effective use of these products under a variety of operating systems and applications.
In addition, our recent generation graphics products have Linux® driver support.
We also provide the AMD FirePro S-Series GPU products for the server market, where we target high performance computing (HPC) primarily focused on Deep Neutral Networks (DNN), Geosciences, Biosciences, Academic and Government workloads, and virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) use cases primarily focused on workstation-class virtualization, desktop remoting and content streaming workloads.
In July 2015, we announced our new AMD FirePro™ S9170 server GPU, designed for high performance compute (HPC) environments.
In December 2015, we launched the AMD FirePro W4300 graphics card designed for Computer-Aided Design (CAD) for both small and full-size workstations.
Embedded products address computing needs in PC-adjacent markets, such as industrial control and automation, digital signage, point-of-sale/self- service kiosks, medical imaging, set-top box and casino gaming machines as well as enterprise class telecommunications, networking, security, storage systems and thin clients (which are computers that serve as an access device on a network).
Typically, our embedded products are used in applications that require high to moderate levels of performance, where key features may include mobility, relatively low power, small form factor, and 24x7 operations.
High-performance graphics are increasingly important in many embedded systems.
Support for Linux®, Windows® and other operating systems as well as for increasingly sophisticated applications are also critical for some customers.
Other requirements may include meeting rigid specifications for industrial temperatures, shock, vibration and reliability.
The embedded market has moved from developing proprietary, custom designs to leveraging industry-standard instruction set architectures and processors as a way to help reduce costs and speed time to market.
S e m i - C u s t o m .
Our semi-custom products are tailored, high-performance, customer-specific solutions based on AMD’s CPU, GPU and multi-media technologies.
We work closely together with our customers to define solutions to precisely match the requirements of the device or application.
Historically we have leveraged our core graphics processing technology into the game console market by licensing our graphic technology in game consoles such as the Microsoft® Xbox 360™ and Nintendo Wii and Wii U.
More recently, we developed the semi-custom SoC products that power the Sony Playstation ® 4 and Microsoft® Xbox One™ game consoles.
We sell our products through our direct sales force and through independent distributors and sales representatives in both domestic and international markets.
Our sales arrangements generally operate on the basis of product forecasts provided by the particular customer, but do not typically include any commitment or requirement for minimum product purchases.
We primarily use purchase orders, sales order acknowledgments and contractual agreements as evidence of our sales arrangements.
Our agreements typically contain standard terms and conditions covering matters such as payment terms, warranties and indemnities for issues specific to our products.
We generally warrant that our products sold to our customers will conform to our approved specifications and be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service for one year.
Subject to certain exceptions, we also offer a three-year limited warranty to end users for those CPU and AMD A-Series APU products purchased as individually packaged products, commonly referred to as “processors in a box”, and for PC workstation products.
We have also offered extended limited warranties to certain customers of “tray” microprocessor products and/or workstation graphics products who have written agreements with us and target their computer systems at the commercial and/or embedded markets.
We market and sell our latest products under the AMD trademark.
Our desktop PC product brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series, AMD E-Series, AMD FX™ CPU, AMD Athlon™ CPU and APU, AMD Sempron™ APU and CPU and AMD Pro A-Series APU.
Our notebook and 2-in-1s for microprocessors are AMD A- Series, AMD E-Series, AMD C-Series, AMD Z-Series, AMD FX™ APU, AMD Phenom™, AMD Athlon CPU and APU, AMD Turion™ and AMD Sempron APU and CPU.
Our server brand for microprocessors is AMD Opteron™.
We also sell low-power versions of our AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron, as well as AMD Geode™, AMD R-Series and G-Series processors as embedded processor solutions.
Our product brand for the consumer graphics market is AMD Radeon, and AMD Embedded Radeon is our product brand for the embedded graphics market.
Our product brand for professional graphics products is AMD FirePro™.
We also market and sell our chipsets under the AMD trademark.
We market our products through our direct marketing and co-marketing programs.
In addition, we have cooperative advertising and marketing programs with customers and third parties, including market development programs, pursuant to which we may provide product information, training, marketing materials and funds.
Under our co-marketing development programs, eligible customers can use market development funds as reimbursement for advertisements and marketing programs related to our products and third-party systems integrating our products, subject to meeting defined criteria.
Our microprocessor customers consist primarily of original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), original design manufacturers (ODMs), system builders and independent distributors in both domestic and international markets.
ODMs provide design and/or manufacturing services to branded and unbranded private label resellers, OEMs and system builders.
Our graphics product customers include the foregoing as well as add-in-board manufacturers (AIBs).
Customers of our chipset products consist primarily of PC and server OEMs, often through ODMs or other contract manufacturers, who build the OEM motherboards, as well as desktop and server motherboard manufacturers who incorporate chipsets into their channel motherboards.
We work closely with our customers to define product features, performance and timing of new products so that the products we are developing meet our customers’ needs.
We also employ application engineers to assist our customers in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products.
We believe that our commitment to customer service and design support improves our customers’ time-to-market and fosters relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
We work closely with our customers to create differentiated products that leverage our CPU, GPU and APU technology.
Customers of our semi-custom products pay us non-recurring engineering fees for design and development services and a purchase price for the resulting semi-custom products.
Collectively, our top five customers accounted for approximately 68% of our net revenue during the year ended 2015.
In 2015, Microsoft Corporation and Sony Corporation each accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated net revenues.
Sales to Microsoft and Sony consisted primarily of products from our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment.
Five customers accounted for approximately 53% of the net revenue attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment.
In addition, five customers, including Sony and Microsoft, accounted for approximately 95% of the net revenue attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment.
A loss of any of these customers would have a material adverse effect on our business.
We focus on three types of OEM customers: multi-nationals, selected regional accounts and target market customers.
Large multi-nationals and regional accounts are our core OEM customers.
Our OEM customers include numerous foreign and domestic manufacturers of servers and workstations, desktops, notebooks, PC motherboards and game consoles.
Typically, distributors handle a wide variety of products, and may include those that compete with our products.
Distributors typically maintain an inventory of our products.
In most instances, our agreements with distributors protect their inventory of our products against price reductions and provide return rights with respect to any product that we have removed from our price book that is not more than 12 months older than the manufacturing code date.
In addition, some agreements with our distributors may contain standard stock rotation provisions permitting limited levels of product returns.
We offer component-level graphics and chipset products to AIB manufacturers who in turn build and sell board-level products using our technology to system integrators (SIs), and to retail buyers.
Our agreements with AIBs protect their inventory of our products against price reductions.
We also sell directly to our SI customers.
SIs typically sell from positions of regional or product-based strength in the market.
They usually operate on short design cycles and can respond quickly with new technologies.
SIs often use discrete graphics solutions as a means to differentiate their products and add value to their customers.
Generally, the IC industry is intensely competitive.
Products typically compete on timely product introductions, product quality (including enabling state-of-the art visual experiences), power consumption (including battery life), reliability, processor clock speed, performance, size (or form factor), selling price, cost, adherence to industry standards (and the creation of open industry standards), level of integration, software and hardware compatibility and stability, brand recognition and availability.
Technological advances in the industry can result in frequent product introductions, regular price reductions and short product life cycles for some products, and increased product capabilities that may result in significant performance improvements.
Our ability to compete depends on our ability to develop, introduce and sell new products or enhanced versions of existing products on a timely basis and at competitive prices, with competitive costs.
Intel Corporation has been the market share leader for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to influence customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for many of our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, which can make them less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, can become distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards and specifications for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions which may limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners that require or result in exclusive product arrangements; de facto control over industry standards, and heavy influence on PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its market position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel has introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Intel’s position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Other competitors include a variety of companies providing or developing ARM-based designs at relatively low cost and low power processors for the computing market including tablets and thin-client form factors, as well as dense servers, set-top boxes and gaming consoles.
ARM Holdings designs and licenses its ARM architecture to third parties, including us, and offers supporting software and services.
Our ability to compete with companies who use ARM-based solutions depends on our ability to timely design and bring to market energy-efficient, high-performing products at an attractive price point.
In the chipset market, our competitors include suppliers of IGP chipsets.
PC manufacturers use IGP chipsets because they typically cost less than traditional discrete GPUs while offering acceptable graphics performance for most mainstream PC users.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its IGP chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells IGP chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is our main competitor in this market.
In the graphics market, our competitors include suppliers of discrete graphics, embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets, and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
Higher unit shipments of our APUs and Intel’s integrated graphics may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for notebooks, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could take actions that place our discrete GPUs and IGP chipsets at a competitive disadvantage such as giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Our principal competitor in the graphics market is Nvidia.
AMD and Nvidia are the two principal players offering discrete graphics solutions.
Other competitors include a number of smaller companies, which may have greater flexibility to address specific market needs, but less financial resources to do so, especially as we believe that the growing complexity of graphics processors and the associated research and development costs represent an increasingly higher barrier to entry in this market.
In the semi-custom game console products, where graphics performance is critical, we compete primarily against Nvidia, and also compete against Imagination Technology Group.
We focus our research and development activities on improving product performance and enhancing product design.
Our main area of focus is on delivering the next generation of CPU and GPU IP, and designing that IP into our SoCs for our next generation of products,with, in each case, improved system performance and performance-per-watt characteristics.
For example, we are focusing on improving the battery life of our microprocessors and APU products for notebooks and the power efficiency of our microprocessors for servers.
We are also focusing on delivering a range of low-power integrated platforms to serve key markets, including commercial clients, mobile computing and gaming and media computing.
We believe that these platforms will bring customers increased performance and energy efficiency.
We also work with industry leaders on process technology, software and other functional intellectual property and we work with others in the industry and industry consortia to conduct early stage research and development.
Our research and development expenses for 2015, 2014 and 2013 were approximately $0.9 billion, $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
For more information, see “Part II, Item 7-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” below.
We conduct product and system research and development activities for our products in the United States with additional design and development engineering teams located in China, Canada, India, Singapore, Taiwan and Israel.
Manufacturing Arrangements and Assembly and Test Facilities We own and operate two assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities which are subject of the transaction noted below.
Some wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities are described in the chart set forth below: The remaining wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our test, assembly and packaging partners located in the Asia-Pacific region who package and test our final semiconductor products.
On October 15, 2015, we entered into an Equity Interest Purchase Agreement (the Equity Interest Purchase Agreement) with Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd., a Chinese joint stock company (JV Party), under which we will sell to JV Party a majority of the equity interests in AMD Technologies (China) Co. Ltd., a wholly-foreign owned enterprise incorporated as a limited liability company (the Chinese Target Company), and Advanced Micro Devices Export Sdn.
Bhd., a Malaysian limited liability company (the Malaysian Target Company and, together with the Chinese Target Company, the Target Companies), thereby forming two joint ventures (collectively, the JVs) with JV Party in a transaction valued at approximately $436 million (the Transaction).
The JV Party will acquire 85% of the equity interests in each JV for approximately $371 million and we estimate we will receive approximately $320 million cash, net of taxes and other customary expenses.
After closing, JV Party’s affiliates will own 85% of the equity interests in each JV while certain of our subsidiaries will own the remaining 15%.
The Transaction will result in the JVs providing assembly, testing, marking, packing and packaging services (ATMP) to us.
We plan to account for our investment in the JVs under the equity method of accounting.The Transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2016, pending successful completion of regulatory and other approvals.
We rely on contracts and intellectual property rights to protect our products and technologies from unauthorized third-party copying and use.
Intellectual property rights include copyrights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, trade secrets and maskwork rights.
As of December 26, 2015, we had approximately 4,965 patents in the United States and approximately 895 patent applications pending in the United States.
In certain cases, we have filed corresponding applications in foreign jurisdictions.
Including United States and foreign matters, we have approximately 10,330 patent matters worldwide consisting of approximately 7,370 issued patents and 2,935 patent applications pending.
We expect to file future patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions, as we deem appropriate.
We do not believe that any individual patent, or the expiration of any patent, is or would be material to our business.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, we have numerous cross-licensing and technology exchange agreements with other companies under which we both transfer and receive technology and intellectual property rights.
One such agreement is the cross license agreement that we entered into with Intel on November 11, 2009.
Under the cross license agreement, we granted to Intel and Intel granted to us, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all of each other’s patents that were first filed no later than November 11, 2014 and each party can exploit these patents anywhere in the world for making and selling certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has rights to make semiconductor products for third parties, but the third-party product designs are not licensed as a result of such manufacture.
We have rights to perform assembly and testing for third parties but not rights to make semiconductor products for third parties.
The term of the cross license agreement continues until the expiration of the last to expire of the licensed patents, unless earlier terminated.
A party can terminate the cross license agreement or the rights and licenses of the other party if the other party materially breaches the cross license agreement and does not correct the noticed material breach within 60 days.
Upon such termination, the terminated party’s license rights terminate but the terminating party’s license rights continue, subject to that party’s continued compliance with the terms of the cross license agreement.
The cross license agreement will automatically terminate if a party undergoes a change of control (as defined in the cross license agreement), and both parties’ licenses will terminate.
Upon the bankruptcy of a party, that party may assume, but may not assign, the cross license agreement, and in the event that the cross license agreement cannot be assumed, the cross license agreement and the licenses granted will terminate.
Sales are made primarily pursuant to purchase orders for current delivery or agreements covering purchases over a period of time.
Some of these orders or agreements may be revised or canceled without penalty.
Generally, in light of current industry practice, we do not believe that such orders or agreements provide meaningful backlog figures or are necessarily indicative of actual sales for any succeeding period.
Our operating results tend to vary seasonally.
For example, historically, first quarter PC product sales are generally lower than fourth quarter sales.
In addition, with respect to our semi-custom SoC products for game consoles, we expect sales patterns to follow the seasonal trends of a consumer business with sales in the first half of the year being lower than sales in the second half of the year.
As of December 26, 2015, we had approximately 9,100 employees.
Our operations and properties have in the past been and continue to be subject to various United States and foreign environmental laws and regulations, including those relating to materials used in our products and manufacturing processes, discharge of pollutants into the environment, the treatment, transport, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes and remediation of contamination.
These laws and regulations require us to obtain permits for our operations, including the discharge of air pollutants and wastewater.
Although our management systems are designed to maintain compliance, we cannot assure you that we have been or will be at all times in complete compliance with such laws, regulations and permits.
If we violate or fail to comply with any of them, a range of consequences could result, including fines, suspension of production, alteration of manufacturing processes, import/export restrictions, sales limitations, criminal and civil liabilities or other sanctions.
We could also be held liable for any and all consequences arising out of exposure to hazardous materials used, stored, released, disposed of by us or located at, under or emanating from our facilities or other environmental or natural resource damage.
While we have budgeted for foreseeable associated expenditures, we cannot assure you that future environmental legal requirements will not become more stringent or costly in the future.
Therefore, we cannot assure you that our costs of complying with current and future environmental and health and safety laws, and our liabilities arising from past and future releases of, or exposure to, hazardous substances will not have a material adverse effect on us.
Environmental laws are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time.
For example, the European Union (EU) and China are two among a growing number of jurisdictions that have enacted restrictions on the use of lead and other materials in electronic products.
These regulations affect semiconductor devices and packaging.
As regulations restricting materials in electronic products continue to increase around the world, there is a risk that the cost, quality and manufacturing yields of products that are subject to these restrictions, may be less favorable compared to products that are not subject to such restrictions, or that the transition to compliant products may not meet customer roadmaps, or produce sudden changes in demand, which may result in excess inventory.
A number of jurisdictions including the EU, Australia and China are developing or have finalized market entry or public procurement regulations for computers and servers based on ENERGY STAR specifications as well as additional energy consumption limits.
There is the potential for certain of our products being excluded from some of these markets which could materially adversely affect us.
Certain environmental laws, including the U.S. Comprehensive, Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, or the Superfund Act, impose strict or, under certain circumstances, joint and several liability on current and previous owners or operators of real property for the cost of removal or remediation of hazardous substances and impose liability for damages to natural resources.
These laws often impose liability even if the owner or operator did not know of, or was not responsible for, the release of such hazardous substances.
These environmental laws also assess liability on persons who arrange for hazardous substances to be sent to disposal or treatment facilities when such facilities are found to be contaminated.
Such persons can be responsible for cleanup costs even if they never owned or operated the contaminated facility.
We have been named as a responsible party at three Superfund sites in Sunnyvale, California.
Although we have not yet been, we could be named a potentially responsible party at other Superfund or contaminated sites in the future.
In addition, contamination that has not yet been identified could exist at our other facilities.
Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) adopted disclosure and reporting requirements for companies that use “conflict” minerals originating from the Democratic Republic of Congo or adjoining countries.
We continue to incur additional costs associated with complying with these requirements, such as costs related to developing internal controls for the due diligence process, determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products, auditing the process and reporting to our customers and the SEC.
Also, since our supply chain is complex, we may face reputational challenges if we are unable to sufficiently verify the origins of the subject minerals.
Moreover, we are likely to encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the components of our products are certified as “conflict free.” If we cannot satisfy these customers, they may choose a competitor’s products.
The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face.
If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
In addition, you should consider the interrelationship and compounding effects of two or more risks occurring simultaneously.
Intel Corporation has been the market share leader for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to influence customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for many of our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards and specifications for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; de facto control over industry standards, and heavy influence on PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its original equipment manufacturer OEM customers.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its market position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel has introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Intel’s position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements, and a certain portion of our GPU product requirements, from GF with limited exceptions.
If GF is unable to achieve anticipated manufacturing yields, remain competitive using or implementing advanced leading-edge process technologies needed to manufacture future generations of our products, manufacture our products on a timely basis at competitive prices or meet our capacity requirements, then we may experience delays in product launches, supply shortages for certain products or increased costs and our business could be materially adversely affected.
Additionally, if our requirements are less than the number of wafers that we committed to purchase, we could have excess inventory or higher inventory unit costs, both of which may adversely impact our gross margin and our results of operations.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a sixth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
If we do not successfully conclude our negotiations, it could have a material adverse impact on our gross margin and our results of operations.
In addition, GF has relied on Mubadala Technology Investments LLC (Mubadala Tech) for its funding needs.
If Mubadala Tech fails to adequately fund GF on a timely basis, or at all, GF’s ability to manufacture products for us could be materially adversely affected.
We rely on third-party wafer foundries to fabricate the silicon wafers for all of our products.
We also rely on third-party manufacturers to assemble, test, mark and pack certain of our products.
It is important to have reliable relationships with all of these third-party manufacturing suppliers to ensure adequate product supply to respond to customer demand.
We cannot guarantee that these manufacturers or our other third-party manufacturing suppliers will be able to meet our near-term or long-term manufacturing requirements.
If we experience supply constraints from our third-party manufacturing suppliers, we may be required to allocate the affected products amongst our customers, which could have a material adverse effect on our relationships with these customers and on our financial condition.
In addition, if we are unable to meet customer demand due to fluctuating or late supply from our manufacturing suppliers, it could result in lost sales and have a material adverse effect on our business.
We do not have long-term commitment contracts with some of our third-party manufacturing suppliers.
We obtain some of these manufacturing services on a purchase order basis and these manufacturers are not required to provide us with any specified minimum quantity of product beyond the quantities in an existing purchase order.
Accordingly, we depend on these suppliers to allocate to us a portion of their manufacturing capacity sufficient to meet our needs, to produce products of acceptable quality and at acceptable manufacturing yields and to deliver those products to us on a timely basis and at acceptable prices.
The manufacturers we use also fabricate wafers and assemble, test and package products for other companies, including certain of our competitors.
They could choose to prioritize capacity for other customers, increase the prices that they charge us on short notice or reduce or eliminate deliveries to us, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
Other risks associated with our dependence on third-party manufacturers include limited control over delivery schedules and quality assurance, lack of capacity in periods of excess demand, misappropriation of our intellectual property, dependence on several small undercapitalized subcontractors and limited ability to manage inventory and parts.
Moreover, if any of our third-party manufacturers suffer any damage to facilities, lose benefits under material agreements, experience power outages, lack sufficient capacity to manufacture our products, encounter financial difficulties, are unable to secure necessary raw materials from their suppliers or suffer any other disruption or reduction in efficiency, we may encounter supply delays or disruptions.
If we are unable to secure sufficient or reliable supplies of products, our ability to meet customer demand may be adversely affected and this could materially affect our business.
If we transition the production of some of our products to new manufacturers, we may experience delayed product introductions, lower yields or poorer performance of our products.
If we experience problems with product quality or are unable to secure sufficient capacity from a particular third-party manufacturer, or if we for other reasons cease utilizing one of those suppliers, we may be unable to secure an alternative supply for any specific product in a short time frame.
We could experience significant delays in the shipment of our products if we are required to find alternative third-party manufacturers, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
The statements in this report include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations.
These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date hereof or as of the dates indicated in the statements and should not be relied upon as predictions of future events, as we cannot assure you that the events or circumstances reflected in these statements will be achieved or will occur.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward- looking terminology including “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “pro forma,” “estimates,” “anticipates,” or the negative of these words and phrases, other variations of these words and phrases or comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements relate to, among other things: the timing, features and functionality of our future products; future patent applications; demand for our products; the growth, change and competitive landscape of the markets in which we participate; the nature and extent of our future payments to GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF) and the materiality of these payments; the materiality of our future purchases from GF; sales patterns of our semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products; consumer PC market conditions; the success of our transformation strategy; our ability to transform our business to attain revenue from high-growth markets; expected Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment research and development costs; expected restructuring charge and cash payments to be made in connection with our restructuring plan announced in October 2014 (the 2014 Restructuring Plan); expected benefits of the 2014 Restructuring Plan and our transformation initiatives; suitability and adequacy of our existing facilities; the level of international sales as compared to total sales; our ability to reduce our unrecognized tax benefits over the next twelve months; that other unrecognized tax benefits will not materially change in the next 12 months; that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, the savings from our 2014 Restructuring Plan and our senior secured asset based line of credit will be sufficient to fund our operations including capital expenditures over the next 12 months; our ability to obtain sufficient external financing on favorable terms, or at all; our dependence on a small number of customers; our hedging strategy; and our expenditures related to environmental compliance and conflict minerals disclosure requirements.
Material factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, without limitation, the following: Intel Corporation’s dominance of the microprocessor market and its aggressive business practices may limit our ability to compete effectively; we rely on GF to manufacture most of our microprocessor and APU products and certain of our GPU and semi-custom products.
If GF is not able to satisfy our manufacturing requirements, our business could be adversely impacted; we rely on third parties to manufacture our products, and if they are unable to do so on a timely basis in sufficient quantities and using competitive technologies, our business could be materially adversely affected; failure to achieve expected manufacturing yields for our products could negatively impact our financial results; the success of our business is dependent upon our ability to introduce products on a timely basis with features and performance levels that provide value to our customers while supporting and coinciding with significant industry transitions; if we cannot generate sufficient revenue and operating cash flow or obtain external financing, we may face a cash shortfall and be unable to make all of our planned investments in research and development or other strategic investments; we may not be able to successfully implement our business strategy to refocus our business to address markets beyond our core PC market to high-growth adjacent markets; the completion and impact of the 2014 Restructuring Plan and our transformation initiatives could adversely affect us; global economic uncertainty may adversely impact our business and operating results; we may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service our debt obligations or meet our working capital requirements; we have a substantial amount of indebtedness which could adversely affect our financial position and prevent us from implementing our strategy or fulfilling our contractual obligations; the agreements governing our notes and our senior secured asset based line of credit for a principal amount up to $500 million (Secured Revolving Line of Credit) impose restrictions on us that may adversely affect our ability to operate our business; the markets in which our products are sold are highly competitive; the loss of a significant customer may have a material adverse effect on us; our receipt of revenue from our semi-custom SoC products is dependent upon our technology being designed into third-party products and the success of those products; the demand for our products depends in part on the market conditions in the industries into which they are sold.
Fluctuations in demand for our products or a market decline in any of these industries could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations; our ability to design and introduce new products in a timely manner is dependent upon third-party intellectual property; we depend on third-party companies for the design, manufacture and supply of motherboards, BIOS software and other computer platform components to support our business; if we lose Microsoft Corporation’s support for our products or other software vendors do not design and develop software to run on our products, our ability to sell our products could be materially adversely affected; we may incur future impairments of goodwill; uncertainties involving the ordering and shipment of our products could materially adversely affect us; our reliance on third-party distributors and AIB partners subjects us to certain risks; our inability to continue to attract and retain qualified personnel may hinder our product development programs; in the event of a change of control, we may not be able to repurchase our outstanding debt as required by the applicable indentures and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit, which would result in a default under the indentures and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit; the semiconductor industry is highly cyclical and has experienced severe downturns that have materially adversely affected, and may continue to materially adversely affect, our business in the future; our business is dependent upon the proper functioning of our internal business processes and information systems and modification or interruption of such systems may disrupt our business, processes and internal controls; data breaches and cyber-attacks could compromise our intellectual property or other sensitive information and cause significant damage to our business and reputation; our operating results are subject to quarterly and seasonal sales patterns; if essential equipment or materials are not available to manufacture our products, we could be materially adversely affected; if our products are not compatible with some or all industry-standard software and hardware, we could be materially adversely affected; costs related to defective products could have a material adverse effect on us; if we fail to maintain the efficiency of our supply chain as we respond to changes in customer demand for our products, our business could be materially adversely affected; we outsource to third parties certain supply-chain logistics functions, including portions of our product distribution, transportation management and information technology support services; acquisitions could disrupt our business, harm our financial condition and operating results or dilute, or adversely affect the price of, our common stock; our worldwide operations are subject to political, legal and economic risks and natural disasters, which could have a material adverse effect on us; worldwide political conditions may adversely affect demand for our products; unfavorable currency exchange rate fluctuations could adversely affect us; our inability to effectively control the sales of our products on the gray market could have a material adverse effect on us; if we cannot adequately protect our technology or other intellectual property in the United States and abroad, through patents, copyrights, trade secrets, trademarks and other measures, we may lose a competitive advantage and incur significant expenses; we are party to litigation and may become a party to other claims or litigation that could cause us to incur substantial costs or pay substantial damages or prohibit us from selling our products; a variety of environmental laws that we are subject to could result in additional costs and liabilities; higher health care costs and labor costs could adversely affect our business; and, our business is subject to potential tax liabilities.
For a discussion of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, see “Part I, Item 1A-Risk Factors” and the “Financial Condition” section set forth in “Part II, Item 7-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A, beginning on page 41 below and such other risks and uncertainties as set forth below in this report or detailed in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports and filings.
We assume no obligation to update forward- looking statements.
We are a global semiconductor company with facilities worldwide.
Within the global semiconductor industry, we offer primarily: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, discrete graphics processing units (GPUs) and professional graphics; and server and embedded processors, dense servers, semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products and technology for game consoles.
For financial information about geographic areas and for segment information with respect to revenues and operating results, refer to the information set forth in Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements, beginning on page 95 below.
We were incorporated under the laws of Delaware on May 1, 1969 and became a publicly held company in 1972.
Our common stock was listed on the New York Stock Exchange from 1979 until the close of trading on December 31, 2014.
On January 2, 2015, we transferred the listing of our common stock to The Nasdaq Stock Market under the symbol “AMD”.
Our mailing address and executive offices are located at One AMD Place, Sunnyvale, California 94088, and our telephone number is (408) 749-4000.
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, ATI, the ATI logo, AMD Athlon, AMD Opteron, AMD Phenom, AMD Sempron, AMD Turion, FirePro, CrossFire, Radeon, Geode, SeaMicro and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Microsoft, Windows, Xbox360 and Xbox One are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other jurisdictions.
PlayStation is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Wii and Wii U are registered trademarks of Nintendo of America, Inc.
ARM and Cortex are registered trademarks of ARM Limited (or its subsidiaries).
Other names are for informational purposes only and are used to identify companies and products and may be trademarks of their respective owners.
On the Investor Relations pages of our Web site, www.amd.com, we post links to our filings with the SEC, our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Ethics for our executive officers and all other senior finance executives, our “Worldwide Standards of Business Conduct,” which applies to our Board of Directors and all of our employees, and the charters of the Audit and Finance, Compensation, Nominating and Corporate Governance and Innovation and Technology committees of our Board of Directors.
Our filings with the SEC are posted as soon as reasonably practical after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
You can also obtain copies of these documents by writing to us at: Secretary, AMD, 7171 Southwest Parkway, M/S B100.2, Austin, Texas 78735, or emailing us at: Corporate.Secretary@amd.com.
All of these documents and filings are available free of charge.
If we make substantive amendments to our Code of Ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller or persons performing similar functions, we intend to disclose the nature of such amendment or waiver on our Web site or in a Current Report on Form 8-K in accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
The information contained on our Web site is not incorporated by reference in, or considered to be a part of, this report.
We are a global semiconductor company.
Semiconductors are components used in a variety of electronic products and systems.
An integrated circuit (IC) is a semiconductor device that consists of many interconnected transistors on a single chip.
Since the invention of the transistor in 1948, improvements in IC process and design technologies have led to the development of smaller, more complex and more reliable ICs at a lower cost-per-function.
Developments in IC design and manufacturing process technologies have resulted in significant advances in microprocessor performance.
As businesses and consumers require greater performance from their computer systems due to the growth of digital data and increasingly sophisticated software applications, semiconductor companies are designing and developing multi-core microprocessors, where multiple processor cores are placed on a single die or in a single processor.
Multi-core microprocessors offer enhanced overall system performance and efficiency because computing tasks can be spread across two or more processing cores, each of which can execute a task at full speed.
Multi- core microprocessors can increase performance of a computer system without greatly increasing the total amount of power consumed and the total amount of heat emitted.
Businesses and consumers also require computer systems with improved power management technology, which helps them to reduce the power consumption of their computer systems and lower total cost of ownership.
An APU is a processing unit that integrates a CPU and a GPU onto one chip (or one piece of silicon), along with, in some cases, other special-purpose components.
This integration enhances system performance by “offloading” selected tasks to the best-suited component (i.e., the CPU or the GPU) to optimize component use, increasing the speed of data flow between the CPU and GPU through shared memory and allowing the GPU to function as both a graphics engine and an application accelerator.
Having the CPU and GPU on the same chip also typically improves energy efficiency by, for example, eliminating connections between discrete chips.
An SoC is a type of IC with a CPU, GPU and other components, such as a memory controller and peripheral management, comprising a complete computing system on a single chip.
By combining all of these elements as an SoC, system performance and energy efficiency is improved, similar to an APU.
Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA) describes an industry standard that is an overarching design for having combinations of CPU and GPU processor cores operate as a unified, integrated engine that shares system responsibilities and resources.
We are a founding member of the HSA Foundation, a non-profit organization established to define and promote this open standards-based approach to heterogeneous computing.
Heterogeneous computing allows for the elevation of the GPU to the same level of the CPU for memory access, queuing and execution.
In other words, rather than having a CPU as a master and other various processors as subordinates, these CPU and GPU processing units can be referred to as “compute cores” (where each core is capable of running at least one process in its own context and virtual memory space, independently from other cores).
Heterogeneous computing also allows software programmers to develop applications that more fully utilize the full compute capabilities of APUs and SoCs.
Our microprocessors are incorporated into computing platforms, which are a collection of technologies that are designed to work together to provide a more complete computing solution and to enable and advance the computing components.
We believe that integrated, balanced computing platforms consisting of microprocessors, chipsets and GPUs that work together at the system level bring end users improved system stability, increased performance and enhanced power efficiency.
In addition, we believe our customers also benefit from an all-AMD platform (consisting of an APU or CPU, a discrete GPU and a chipset or an AMD Fusion Controller Hub chip), as we are able to optimize interoperability, provide them with a single point of contact for the key platform components and enable them to bring the platforms to market faster in a variety of client and server system form factors.
We currently base our microprocessors and chipsets on the x86 instruction set architecture and AMD’s Direct Connect Architecture, which connects an on-chip memory controller and input/output (I/O) channels directly to one or more microprocessor cores.
We typically integrate two or more processor cores onto a single die, and each core has its own dedicated cache, which is memory that is located on the semiconductor die, permitting quicker access to frequently used data and instructions.
Some of our microprocessors have additional levels of cache such as L2, or second-level cache, and L3, or third-level cache, to enable faster data access and higher performance.
We focus on continually improving the energy efficiency of our products through our design principles and innovations in power management technology.
To that end, we offer CPUs, GPUs, APUs, SoCs and chipsets with multiple low power states that utilize lower clock speeds and voltages to reduce processor power consumption during active and idle times.
The use of intelligent, dynamic power management is designed to create lower energy use by allowing compute applications to be completed quickly and efficiently, enabling a return to the ultra- low power idle state.
These APUs combine discrete-level AMD Radeon™ graphics, dedicated HD video processing and multi-core CPU processors on a single chip and are designed to maximize performance and energy efficiency.
In April 2014, we announced our 2014 mainstream and low-power APUs and mobile APUs, formerly codenamed “Beema” and “Mullins,” respectively, which feature up to four newly-designed x86 CPU cores with AMD Radeon graphics and a hardware-level data security solution based on the ARM® Cortex®-A5, all on a single SoC.
In June 2014, we introduced our 2014 Performance Mobile APUs, formerly codenamed “Kaveri,” designed for ultrathin and high-performance mobile PCs.
As part of the 2014 Performance Mobile APUs, we introduced the AMD FX APU designed for enthusiast-level performance for gaming and multitasking.
Also, in June 2014, we announced our new AMD Pro A-Series APUs with HSA features designed for commercial notebook PCs.
The semiconductor graphics market addresses the need for improved visual processing in various computing devices.
Many consumers value a rich visual experience to enable a more compelling and immersive experience, and, for these consumers, the PC is evolving from a traditional data processing and communications device to an entertainment platform.
As a result, visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key product differentiation elements among computing devices.
This has led to increasing creation and use of processing- intensive multimedia content for computing devices, including playing games, capturing TV and other multimedia content, viewing online videos, photo editing and managing digital content.
In turn, these trends have contributed to higher consumer demand for performance graphics solutions and manufacturers designing computing devices with these capabilities.
Our APUs deliver visual processing functionality for value and mainstream PCs by integrating a CPU and a GPU on a single chip, while discrete GPUs (which are also known as dedicated GPUs) are on a separate chip from the CPU and are specifically architected for higher performance graphics processing.
Heavy computational workloads have traditionally been processed on a CPU, but we believe that the industry is shifting to a new computing paradigm that increasingly relies more on a discrete GPU or an APU.
AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing or GPGPU (General Purpose GPU) refers to a set of advanced hardware and software technologies that enable discrete AMD GPUs, working in concert with the CPU, to accelerate applications beyond traditional graphics and video processing by allowing the discrete GPU and the CPU to process information cooperatively.
In addition, computing devices with HSA features run computationally-intensive tasks more efficiently, which we believe provides a superior application experience to the end user.
Our graphics products can be found in an APU, GPU, SoC or a combination of a GPU with one of the other foregoing products working in tandem.
Our customers generally use our graphics solutions to increase the speed of rendering images and to help improve image resolution and color definition.
We develop our graphics products for use in various computing devices and entertainment platforms, including desktop PCs, notebook PCs, 2-in-1s and professional workstations.
With each of our graphics products, we have available drivers and supporting software packages that enable the effective use of these products under a variety of operating systems and applications.
In addition, our recent generation graphics products have Linux® driver support.
PCs include the AMD Radeon R7 and R9 series, AMD Radeon HD 8000 series, AMD Radeon 7000 series and AMD Radeon HD 6000 series.
In February 2014, we introduced two new additions to the R7 series—the AMD Radeon R7 250X and R7 265.
In March 2014, we added the AMD Radeon R9 280 to the R9 Series, and more recently in April 2014, we introduced the AMD Radeon R9 295X2, powered by two AMD Radeon R9 295 GPUs on a single card designed for gamers and PC enthusiasts.
All models of our AMD Radeon R7 and R9 series graphic cards support our Mantle API.
We also provide the AMD FirePro S-Series GPU products for the server market, where we target high performance computing (HPC) and virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) use cases.
In April 2014, we launched the AMD FirePro W9100 professional graphics cards for next- generation workstations with ultra-high resolution and multi-display capabilities.
In June 2014, we launched the AMD FirePro W8100 professional graphics card designed for the next generation 4K CAD and media and entertainment workflows, engineering analysis and supercomputing applications.
In August 2014, we introduced new additions to the next generation AMD FirePro professional graphics family, the AMD FirePro W2100, AMD FirePro W4100, AMD FirePro W5100 and AMD FirePro W7100.
Additionally, we announced the AMD FirePro S9150 Server GPU in August 2014, designed for large scale multi-GPU support and the AMD FirePro S9100 in October 2014, designed for high visualization, high throughput and multi-tasking.
High performance graphics are increasingly important in many embedded systems.
Support for Linux, Windows and other operating systems as well as for increasingly sophisticated applications are also critical for some customers.
Other requirements may include meeting rigid specifications for industrial temperatures, shock, vibration and reliability.
The embedded market has moved from developing proprietary, custom designs to leveraging industry-standard instruction set architectures and processors as a way to help reduce costs and speed time to market.
The AMD OpteronTM X-Series includes small-core x86 APUs and CPUs that are ideal for next-generation scale-out Web and cloud applications ranging from big data analytics to image processing, multimedia content delivery and hosting.
AMD Opteron 6300 Series processors, which are designed to meet the demanding performance per-watt, per-dollar requirements that are at the heart of server buying decisions.
The AMD Opteron 6338P (12 core) and 6370P (16 core) processors are optimized to handle the heavily virtualized workloads found in enterprise environments.
These processors feature the “Piledriver” core and are fully socket and software compatible with the existing AMD Opteron 6300 Series.
During 2014, we began sampling the AMD Opteron A1100 Series processor, our first 64-bit ARM-based server processor based on 28nm technology.
AMD Opteron A-Series processors combine AMD’s expertise in delivering server-class silicon with ARM’s trademark low-power architecture.
These products are designed to bring the experience and technology portfolio of an established server processor vendor to the ARM ecosystem and complement our AMD Opteron x86 server processors.
The first AMD Opteron A-Series processors are expected to launch later in 2015.
Our second generation AMD Embedded R-Series APU and CPU launched in May 2014, formerly codenamed “Bald Eagle,” supports HSA and was designed for processing performance, power efficiency and multimedia immersion in mid-to high-end visual and parallel compute-intensive embedded applications.
The AMD Embedded G-Series SoC platform is a high-performance, low-power design offering ultra-low power consumption and advanced graphics performance.
In June 2014, we announced our AMD Embedded G-Series SoC, formerly codenamed “Steppe Eagle,” designed for rugged and harsh environments such as ATMs, kiosks, automation, medical equipment and gaming machines.
Also in June 2014, we introduced another AMD Embedded G-Series CPU, formerly codenamed “Crowned Eagle,” for networking and communications infrastructure applications that require high performance at low cost and low power.
The AMD Embedded Radeon™ E-Series GPU family includes a broad array of discrete GPU products designed to provide immersive graphics and enhanced parallel compute capabilities for the embedded market.
The AMD Embedded Radeon E8860 GPU is the industry’s first discrete graphics card for embedded applications based on GCN architecture, delivering 3D and 4K graphics to embedded gaming machines, digital signage, medical imaging, commercial aerospace, and other embedded applications.
In October 2014, we began sampling our first 64-bit ARM Cortex-A57-based AMD Embedded R-Series SoC, codenamed “Hierofalcon.” The AMD Embedded R-Series SoC platform is designed for embedded data center applications, communications infrastructure and industrial solutions and is expected to ship in the first half of 2015.
Our semi-custom products are tailored, high-performance customer-specific solutions based on AMD’s CPU, GPU and multi-media technologies.
We work closely together with our customers to define solutions to precisely match the requirements of the device or application.
Historically we have leveraged our core graphics processing technology into the game console market by licensing our graphic technology in game consoles such as the Microsoft® Xbox 360™ and Nintendo Wii and Wii U.
In the fourth quarter of 2013, Sony launched its Sony Playstation®4 and Microsoft launched its Microsoft® Xbox One.
Both of these next-generation game consoles are powered by AMD We sell our products through our direct sales force and through independent distributors and sales representatives in both domestic and international markets.
Our sales arrangements generally operate on the basis of product forecasts provided by the particular customer, but do not typically include any commitment or requirement for minimum product purchases.
We primarily use purchase orders, sales order acknowledgments and contractual agreements as evidence of our sales arrangements.
Our agreements typically contain standard terms and conditions covering matters such as payment terms, warranties and indemnities for issues specific to our products.
We generally warrant that our products sold to our customers will conform to our approved specifications and be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service for one year.
Subject to certain exceptions, we also offer a three-year limited warranty to end users for only those CPU and AMD A-Series APU products purchased as individually packaged products, commonly referred to as “processors in a box” and for PC workstation products.
We have also offered extended limited warranties to certain customers of “tray” microprocessor products for each of our business units and/or workstation graphics products who have written agreements with us and target their computer systems at the commercial and/or embedded markets.
We market and sell our latest products under the AMD trademark and some legacy graphics products under the ATI trademark.
Our desktop PC product brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series, AMD E-Series, AMD FX CPU, AMD Athlon CPU and APU and AMD Sempron APU and CPU.
Our notebook and 2-in-1s for microprocessors are AMD A-Series, AMD E-Series, AMD C-Series, AMD Z-Series, AMD FX APU, AMD Phenom, AMD Athlon CPU and APU, AMD Turion and AMD Sempron APU and CPU.
Our server brand for microprocessors is AMD Opteron.
We sell dense server systems products under the SeaMicro brand, including the SM15000 series and Freedom Fabric Storage series for storage systems.
We also sell low-power versions of our AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron, as well as AMD Geode, AMD R-Series and G-Series processors as embedded processor solutions.
Our product brand for the consumer graphics market is AMD Radeon.
Our product brand for professional graphics products is AMD FirePro.
We also market and sell our chipsets under the AMD trademark.
We market our products through our direct marketing and co-marketing programs.
In addition, we have cooperative advertising and marketing programs with customers and third parties, including market development programs, pursuant to which we may provide product information, training, marketing materials and funds.
Under our co-marketing development programs, eligible customers can use market development funds as reimbursement for advertisements and marketing programs related to our products and third-party systems integrating our products, subject to meeting defined criteria.
Our microprocessor customers consist primarily of original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), original design manufacturers (ODMs), system builders and independent distributors in both domestic and international markets.
ODMs provide design and/or manufacturing services to branded and unbranded private label resellers, OEMs and system builders.
Our graphics product customers include the foregoing as well as add-in-board manufacturers (AIBs).
Customers of our chipset products consist primarily of PC and server OEMs, often through ODMs or other contract manufacturers, who build the OEM motherboards, as well as desktop and server motherboard manufacturers who incorporate chipsets into their channel motherboards.
We work closely with our customers to define product features, performance and timing of new products so that the products we are developing meet our customers’ needs.
We also employ application engineers to assist our customers in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products.
We believe that our commitment to customer service and design support improves our customers’ time-to-market and fosters relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
We work closely with our customers to create differentiated products that leverage our CPU, GPU and APU technology.
In some cases, customers of our semi-custom products pay us non-recurring engineering fees for design and development services and a purchase price for the resulting semi-custom products.
Collectively, our top five customers accounted for approximately 61% of our net revenue during the year ended 2014.
In 2014, Hewlett- Packard Company, Microsoft Corporation and Sony Corporation each accounted for more than 13% of our consolidated net revenues.
Sales to Hewlett-Packard consisted primarily of products from our Computing and Graphics segment.
Sales to Microsoft and Sony consisted primarily of products from our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment.
Five customers, including Hewlett-Packard, accounted for approximately 54% of the net revenue attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment.
In addition, five customers, including Sony, Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard, accounted for approximately 90% of the net revenue attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi- Custom segment.
A loss of any of these customers would have a material adverse effect on our business.
We focus on three types of OEM customers: multi-nationals, selected regional accounts and target market customers.
Large multi- nationals and regional accounts are our core OEM customers.
Our OEM customers include numerous foreign and domestic manufacturers of servers and workstations, desktops, notebooks, PC motherboards and game consoles.
Typically, distributors handle a wide variety of products, including those that compete with our products.
Distributors typically maintain an inventory of our products.
In most instances, our agreements with distributors protect their inventory of our products against price reductions and provide return rights with respect to any product that we have removed from our price book that is not more than 12 months older than the manufacturing code date.
In addition, some agreements with our distributors may contain standard stock rotation provisions permitting limited levels of product returns.
We offer component-level graphics and chipset products to AIB manufacturers who in turn build and sell board-level products using our technology to system integrators (SIs), and to retail buyers.
Our agreements with AIBs protect their inventory of our products against price reductions.
We also sell directly to our SI customers.
SIs typically sell from positions of regional or product-based strength in the market.
They usually operate on short design cycles and can respond quickly with new technologies.
SIs often use discrete graphics solutions as a means to differentiate their products and add value to their customers.
Generally, the IC industry is intensely competitive.
Products typically compete on timely product introductions, product quality (including enabling state-of-the art visual experiences), power consumption (including battery life), reliability, processor clock speed, performance, size (or form factor), selling, price, cost, adherence to industry standards (and the creation of open industry standards), level of integration, software and hardware compatibility and stability, brand recognition and availability.
Technological advances in the industry result in frequent product introductions, regular price reductions and short product life cycles for some products, and increased product capabilities that may result in significant performance improvements.
Our ability to compete depends on our ability to develop, introduce and sell new products or enhanced versions of existing products on a timely basis and at competitive prices, while reducing our costs.
Intel Corporation has been the market share leader for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to influence customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for many of our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards and specifications for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its market position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel recently introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel’s position in the microprocessor market and IGP chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Other competitors include a variety of companies providing or developing ARM-based designs at relatively low cost and low power processors for the computing market including netbooks, tablets and thin-client form factors, as well as dense servers, set-top boxes and gaming consoles.
ARM Holdings designs and licenses its ARM architecture to third parties, including us, and offers supporting software and services.
Our ability to compete with companies who use ARM-based solutions depends on our ability to timely design and bring to market energy- efficient, high-performing products at an attractive price point.
In the chipset market, our competitors include suppliers of IGP chipsets.
PC manufacturers use IGP chipsets because they cost less than traditional discrete GPUs while offering acceptable graphics performance for most mainstream PC users.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its IGP chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells IGP chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is our main competitor in this market.
In the graphics market, our competitors include suppliers of discrete graphics, embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets, and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
Higher unit shipments of our APUs and Intel’s integrated graphics may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for notebooks, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could take actions that place our discrete GPUs and IGP chipsets at a competitive disadvantage such as giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Our principal competitor in the graphics market is Nvidia.
AMD and Nvidia are the two principal players offering discrete graphics solutions.
Other competitors include a number of smaller companies, which may have greater flexibility to address specific market needs, but less financial resources to do so, especially as we believe that the growing complexity of graphics processors and the associated research and development costs represent an increasingly higher barrier to entry in this market.
In the semi-custom game console products, where graphics performance is critical, we compete against primarily Nvidia, and also compete against Imagination Technology Group.
We focus our research and development activities on improving and enhancing product design.
One main area of focus is on delivering the next generation of products with greater system level integration of the CPU and GPU and transforming our products into SoCs, with, in each case, improved system performance and performance-per-watt characteristics.
For example, we are focusing on improving the battery life of our microprocessors and APU products for notebooks and the power efficiency of our microprocessors for servers.
We are also focusing on delivering a range of low-power integrated platforms to serve key markets, including commercial clients, mobile computing and gaming and media computing, as well as developing an HSA, which is designed for software developers to easily program APUs by combining scalar processing on the CPU with parallel processing on the GPU, all while providing high bandwidth access to memory at low power.
We believe that these integrated platforms will bring customers better time-to-market and increased performance and energy efficiency.
We also work with industry leaders on process technology, software and other functional intellectual property and we work with others in the industry, public foundations, universities and industry consortia to conduct early stage research and development.
Our research and development expenses for 2014, 2013 and 2012 were approximately $1.1 billion, $1.2 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively.
For more information, see “Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” below.
We conduct product and system research and development activities for our products in the United States with additional design and development engineering teams located in China, Canada, India, Singapore, Taiwan and Israel.
Manufacturing Arrangements and Assembly and Test Facilities We own and operate two assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Some wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities are described in the chart set forth below: The remaining wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our test, assembly and packaging partners located in the Asia-Pacific region who package and test our final semiconductor products.
We rely on contracts and intellectual property rights to protect our products and technologies from unauthorized third-party copying and use.
Intellectual property rights include copyrights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, trade secrets and maskwork rights.
As of December 27, 2014, we had approximately 4,900 patents in the United States and approximately 1,200 patent applications pending in the United States.
In certain cases, we have filed corresponding applications in foreign jurisdictions.
We expect to file future patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions, as we deem appropriate.
We do not believe that any individual patent, or the expiration of any patent, is or would be material to our business.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, we have numerous cross-licensing and technology exchange agreements with other companies under which we both transfer and receive technology and intellectual property rights.
One such agreement is the cross license agreement that we entered into with Intel on November 11, 2009.
Under the cross license agreement, we granted to Intel and Intel granted to us, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all of each other’s patents that were first filed no later than November 11, 2014 and each party can exploit these patents anywhere in the world for making and selling certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has rights to make semiconductor products for third parties, but the third-party product designs are not licensed as a result of such manufacture.
We have rights to perform assembly and testing for third parties but not rights to make semiconductor products for third parties.
The term of the cross license agreement continues until the expiration of the last to expire of the licensed patents, unless earlier terminated.
A party can terminate the cross license agreement or the rights and licenses of the other party if the other party materially breaches the cross license agreement and does not correct the noticed material breach within 60 days.
Upon such termination, the terminated party’s license rights terminate but the terminating party’s license rights continue, subject to that party’s continued compliance with the terms of the cross license agreement.
The cross license agreement will automatically terminate if a party undergoes a change of control (as defined in the cross license agreement), and both parties’ licenses will terminate.
Upon the bankruptcy of a party, that party may assume, but may not assign, the cross license agreement, and in the event that the cross license agreement cannot be assumed, the cross license agreement and the licenses granted will terminate.
Sales are made primarily pursuant to purchase orders for current delivery or agreements covering purchases over a period of time.
Some of these orders or agreements may be revised or canceled without penalty.
Generally, in light of current industry practice, we do not believe that such orders or agreements provide meaningful backlog figures or are necessarily indicative of actual sales for any succeeding period.
Our operating results tend to vary seasonally.
For example, historically, first quarter PC product sales are generally lower than fourth quarter sales.
In addition, with respect to our semi-custom SoC products for game consoles, we expect sales patterns to follow the seasonal trends of a consumer business with sales in the first half of the year being lower than sales in the second half of the year.
As of December 27, 2014, we had approximately 9,700 employees.
Many aspects of our business operations and products are regulated by domestic and international environmental laws and regulations.
These regulations include limitations on discharge of pollutants to air, water, and soil; remediation requirements; product chemical content limitations; manufacturing chemical use and handling restrictions; pollution control requirements; waste minimization considerations; and requirements with respect to treatment, transport, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes.
If we fail to comply with any applicable environmental regulations, we may be subject to fines, suspension of production, alteration of our manufacturing processes, import/export restrictions, sales limitations and/or criminal and civil liabilities.
Existing or future regulations could require us to procure expensive pollution abatement or remediation equipment, to modify product designs or to incur other expenses to comply with environmental regulations.
Any failure to adequately control the use, disposal, storage or discharge of hazardous substances could expose us to future liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on our business.
We believe we are in material compliance with applicable environmental requirements and do not expect those requirements to result in material expenditures in the foreseeable future.
Environmental laws are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time.
For example, the European Union (EU) and China are two among a growing number of jurisdictions that have enacted restrictions on the use of lead and other materials in electronic products.
These regulations affect semiconductor devices and packaging.
As regulations restricting materials in electronic products continue to increase around the world, there is a risk that the cost, quality and manufacturing yields of products that are subject to these restrictions, may be less favorable compared to products that are not subject to such restrictions, or that the transition to compliant products may not meet customer road maps, or produce sudden changes in demand, which may result in excess inventory.
A number of jurisdictions including the EU, Australia and China are developing or have finalized market entry or public procurement regulations for computers and servers based on ENERGY STAR specifications as well as additional energy consumption limits.
There is the potential for certain of our products being excluded from some of these markets which could materially adversely affect us.
Recent U.S. legislation includes disclosure and reporting requirements for companies who use “conflict” minerals that originate from the Democratic Republic of Congo or adjoining countries.
We will likely incur additional costs associated with complying with these requirements, such as costs related to determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products, auditing the process and reporting to our customers and the U.S. government.
Also, since our supply chain is complex, we may face reputational challenges if we are unable to sufficiently verify the origins of the subject minerals.
Moreover, we are likely to encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the components of our products are certified as “conflict free.” If we cannot satisfy these customers, they may choose a competitor’s products.
A number of jurisdictions including the EU, Australia and China are developing or have finalized market entry or public procurement regulations for computers and servers based on ENERGY STAR specifications as well as additional energy consumption limits.
There is the potential for certain of our products being excluded from some of these markets which could materially adversely affect us.
While we have budgeted for foreseeable associated expenditures, we cannot assure you that future environmental legal requirements will not become more stringent or costly in the future.
Therefore, we cannot assure you that our costs of complying with current and future environmental and health and safety laws, and our liabilities arising from past and future releases of, or exposure to, hazardous substances will not have a material adverse effect on us.
See also, “Item 3-Legal Proceedings-Environmental Matters,” below.
The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face.
If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
In addition, you should consider the interrelationship and compounding effects of two or more risks occurring simultaneously.
Intel Corporation has been the market share leader for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to influence customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for many of our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
As a result of Intel’s position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards and specifications for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its market position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel recently introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Intel’s position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
If GF is unable to achieve anticipated manufacturing yields, remain competitive using or implementing advanced leading-edge process technologies needed to manufacture future generations of our products, manufacture our products on a timely basis at competitive prices or meet our capacity requirements, then we may experience delays in product launches, supply shortages for certain products or increased costs and our business could be materially adversely affected.
Further, if our requirements are less than the number of wafers that we may commit to purchase from GF, we could have excess inventory or higher inventory unit costs, both of which will adversely impact our gross margin and our results of operations.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fifth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
If we do not successfully conclude our negotiations, it could have a material adverse impact on our gross margin and our results of operations.
In addition, GF has relied on Mubadala Technology Investments LLC (Mubadala Tech), formerly known as Advanced Technology Investment Company, for its funding needs.
If Mubadala Tech fails to adequately fund GF on a timely basis, or at all, GF’s ability to manufacture products for us could be materially adversely affected.
We rely on third-party wafer foundries to fabricate the silicon wafers for all of our products.
We also rely on third-party manufacturers to assemble, test, mark and pack certain of our products.
It is important to have reliable relationships with all of these third-party manufacturing suppliers to ensure adequate product supply to respond to customer demand.
We cannot assure you that these manufacturers or our other third-party manufacturing suppliers will be able to meet our near-term or long-term manufacturing requirements.
If we experience supply constraints from our third-party manufacturing suppliers, we may be required to allocate the affected products amongst our customers, which could have a material adverse effect on our relationships with these customers and on our financial condition.
In addition, if we are unable to meet customer demand due to fluctuating or late supply from our manufacturing suppliers, it could result in lost sales and have a material adverse effect on our business.
We do not have long-term commitment contracts with some of our third-party manufacturing suppliers.
We obtain some of these manufacturing services on a purchase order basis and these manufacturers are not required to provide us with any specified minimum quantity of product beyond the quantities in an existing purchase order.
Accordingly, we depend on these suppliers to allocate to us a portion of their manufacturing capacity sufficient to meet our needs, to produce products of acceptable quality and at acceptable manufacturing yields and to deliver those products to us on a timely basis and at acceptable prices.
The manufacturers we use also fabricate wafers and assemble, test and package products for other companies, including certain of our competitors.
They could choose to prioritize capacity for other users, increase the prices that they charge us on short notice or reduce or eliminate deliveries to us, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2011 and related notes, which are included in this Form 10-K as well as with the other sections of this Form 10-K, including “Part I, Item 1: Business,” “Part II, Item 6: Selected Financial Data,” and “Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We are a global semiconductor company with facilities around the world.
Within the global semiconductor industry, we offer primarily: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an APU, for the commercial and consumer markets, embedded microprocessors for commercial, commercial client and consumer markets and chipsets for desktop and mobile devices, including mobile PCs and tablets, professional workstations and servers; and graphics, video and multimedia products for desktop and mobile devices, including mobile PCs and tablets, home media PCs and professional workstations, servers and technology for game consoles.
In MD&A, we will describe the general financial condition and the results of operations for Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, including a discussion of our results of operations for 2011 compared to 2010 and 2010 compared to 2009, an analysis of changes in our financial condition and a discussion of our contractual obligations and off balance sheet arrangements.
For accounting purposes, we consolidated the accounts of GLOBALFOUNDRIES, Inc. (GF) and its consolidated subsidiaries from March 2, 2009 through December 26, 2009.
Accordingly, for this period, references in this Item 7 and in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” to “us,” “our,” or “AMD” include the consolidated operating results of AMD and its consolidated subsidiaries, including GF and its consolidated subsidiaries.
In 2011, we experienced important changes in our business.
First, we continued to develop and deliver differentiated products.
We launched our AMD family of APU products and experienced strong customer demand, especially for our AMD E-Series and C-Series APUs designed for low-power desktop and mobile platforms, codenamed “Brazos,” and our AMD A-Series APUs, codenamed “Llano,” for mainstream desktop and mobile platforms.
We introduced a number of competitive graphics products in 2011.
In July 2011, we launched the AMD Radeon™ HD 6990M graphics processor designed for enthusiast mobile gamers.
We also launched the AMD Radeon HD 7970 graphics processor in December 2011, our first graphics processor based on 28nm process technology and AMD’s Graphic Core Next Technology.
We also continued to focus on improving our competitive position in the server market and believe we regained momentum in the second half of 2011 with the introduction of our new multi-core AMD Opteron™ 6200 and 4200 series processors, which are based on our “Bulldozer” x86 architecture.
During 2011, we continued to focus on optimizing our financial model.
In November 2011, we implemented a restructuring plan designed to strengthen our competitive positioning, implement a more competitive cost structure and conduct a workforce rebalancing to better address faster growing market segments.
We expect that the restructuring plan will result in operational savings, primarily in operating expenses, of approximately $118 million in 2012.
We also implemented additional efficiencies across our operations, which we expect will save approximately $90 million in 2012 operating expenses in addition to the restructuring plan savings, resulting in more than $200 million of expected combined operational savings in 2012.
We intend to use a significant portion of the anticipated savings to fund initiatives designed to accelerate our strategies for low power, emerging markets and the cloud.
We also focused on improving our balance sheet.
We reduced our outstanding debt by approximately $200 million principal amount in 2011, and we generated non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow, which we describe in more detail in the “Financial Condition – Liquidity” section below, of $528 million, a significant improvement compared to non- GAAP adjusted free cash flow of $355 million in 2010.
However, our progress during 2011 was tempered by supply constraints related to our 32nm microprocessor products.
We took steps during the course of the year to better manage our relationships with our third-party wafer foundries, and during the second half of 2011, 32nm yields and performance have improved.
Net revenue for 2011 was $6.6 billion, relatively flat compared to net revenue of $6.5 billion for 2010.
Gross margin, as a percentage of net revenue for 2011 was 45%, a 1% decrease compared to 46% in 2010.
Gross margin in 2011 included a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF, primarily related to certain GF manufacturing assets, and a charge of approximately $5 million related to a legal settlement.
Gross margin in 2010 included a $69 million benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF.
Absent the effects of these events, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 45% in each of 2011 and 2010.
Beginning in the first quarter of 2011, we changed our method of accounting for our ownership interest in GF from the equity method to the cost method of accounting.
As a result, we no longer recognize any share of GF’s net income or loss in our consolidated statements of operations.
On March 2, 2009, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement among us, ATIC, and WCH, pursuant to which we formed GF.
At the closing of these transactions (the Closing), we contributed certain assets and liabilities to GF, including, among other things, shares of the groups of German subsidiaries owning our manufacturing facilities, certain manufacturing assets, real property, tangible personal property, employees, inventories, books and records, a portion of our patent portfolio, intellectual property and technology, rights under certain material contracts and authorizations necessary for GF to carry on its business.
In exchange we received GF securities consisting of one Class A Ordinary Share, 1,090,950 Class A Preferred Shares and 700,000 Class B Preferred Shares, and the assumption of certain liabilities by GF.
ATIC contributed $1.4 billion of cash to GF in exchange for GF securities consisting of one Class A Ordinary Share, 218,190 Class A Preferred Shares, 172,760 Class B Preferred Shares, $202 million aggregate principal amount of 4% Class A Subordinated Convertible Notes (the Class A Notes) and $807 million aggregate principal amount of 11% Class B Subordinated Convertible Notes (the Class B Notes), and transferred $700 million of cash to us in exchange for the transfer by us of 700,000 GF Class B Preferred Shares.
At the Closing, we also issued to WCH, for an aggregate purchase price of $125 million, 58 million shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase 35 million shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share (the Warrants).
The Warrants are currently exercisable and expire on March 2, 2019.
The shares issuable under these Warrants have been included in our basic and diluted earnings per share calculation since the third quarter of 2009 when the Warrants became exercisable.
Under the Master Transaction Agreement, the cash consideration that WCH and ATIC paid and the securities that they received are as follows: Cash paid by WCH to AMD for the purchase of 58 million shares of AMD common stock and Warrants: $125 million; Cash paid by ATIC to GF for the aggregate principal amount of Class A Notes, which are convertible into 201,810 Class A Preferred Shares: $202 million; Cash paid by ATIC to GF for the aggregate principal amount of Class B Notes, which are convertible into 807,240 Class B Preferred Shares: $807 million; Cash paid by ATIC to GF for 218,190 Class A Preferred Shares: $218 million; Cash paid by ATIC to GF for 172,760 Class B Preferred Shares: $173 million; and Cash paid by ATIC to AMD for 700,000 Class B Preferred Shares: $700 million.
At the Closing, AMD and ATIC owned 1,090,950, or 83%, and 218,190, or 17%, respectively, of Class A Preferred Shares, and ATIC owned 100% of the Class B Preferred Shares and 100% of the Class A Notes and Class B Notes.
In November 2009, upon the settlement of our litigation with Intel Corporation and the execution of a patent cross license agreement between us and Intel, the requirements satisfying the Reconciliation Event were met.
GF’s Class B Preferred Shares rank senior in right of payment to all other classes or series of equity securities of GF for purposes of dividends, distributions and upon a liquidation, dissolution or winding up of GF (Liquidation Event).
Each Class B Preferred Share is deemed to accrete in value at a rate of 12% per year, compounded semiannually, of the initial purchase price per such share.
The accreted value accrues daily from the Closing and is taken into account upon certain distributions to the holders of Class B Preferred Shares or upon conversion of the Class B Preferred Shares.
Upon a Liquidation Event, each Class B Preferred Share will be entitled to receive, prior to any distribution to the holders of any other classes or series of equity securities, an amount equal to its accreted value.
Each Class B Preferred Share is convertible, at the option of the holder thereof, into Class B Ordinary Shares at the then applicable Class B Conversion Rate.
Each Class B Preferred Share will also automatically convert into Class B Ordinary Shares at the then applicable Class B Conversion Rate upon the earlier of (i) an initial public offering of GF (IPO) or (ii) a change of control transaction of GF.
The initial Class B Conversion Rate is 100 Class B Ordinary Shares for each Class B Preferred Share converted, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments.
The Class B Preferred Shares currently vote on an as-converted basis with any outstanding Ordinary Shares, voting together as a single class, with respect to any question upon which holders of Ordinary Shares have the right to vote.
GF’s Class A Preferred Shares rank senior in right of payment to the Ordinary Shares of GF and junior in right of payment to the Class B Preferred Shares for purposes of dividends, distributions and upon a Liquidation Event.
The Class A Preferred Shares are not entitled to any dividend or pre-determined accretion in value.
Upon a Liquidation Event, each Class A Preferred Share will be entitled to receive, after the distribution to the holders of the Class B Preferred Shares but prior to any distribution to the holders of Ordinary Shares, out of any remaining assets of GF, an amount equal to the initial purchase price per share of the Class A Preferred Shares.
Each Class A Preferred Share is convertible, at the option of the holder, into Class B Ordinary Shares at the then applicable Class A Conversion Rate.
Each Class A Preferred Share will also automatically convert into Class B Ordinary Shares at the then applicable Class A Conversion Rate upon the earlier of an IPO or (ii) a change of control transaction of GF.
The initial Class A Conversion Rate is 100 Class B Ordinary Shares for each Class A Preferred Share, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments.
The Class A Preferred Shares currently vote on an as-converted basis with any outstanding Ordinary Shares, voting together as a single class, with respect to any question upon which holders of Ordinary Shares have the right to vote.
GF’s Class A Notes accrue interest at a rate of 4% per annum, compounded semiannually.
Interest on the Class A Notes is payable semiannually in additional Class A Notes.
The Class A Notes are the unsecured obligations of GF and rank subordinated in right of payment to any current or future senior indebtedness of GF.
The Class A Notes are not redeemable by GF without the note holder’s consent.
The Class A Notes are convertible, in whole or in part, in multiples of $1,000, into GF Class A Preferred Shares at the option of the holder at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date based on the conversion ratio in effect on the date of conversion.
The Class A Notes mature ten years from the date of issuance.
However, they automatically convert into Class A Preferred Shares upon the earlier of (i) an IPO, (ii) certain change of control transactions of GF or (iii) the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date.
GF’s Class B Notes accrue interest at a rate of 11% per annum, compounded semiannually.
Interest on the Class B Notes is payable semiannually in additional Class B Notes.
The Class B Notes are the unsecured obligations of GF and rank subordinated in right of payment to any current or future senior indebtedness of GF.
The Class B Notes are not redeemable by GF without the note holder’s consent.
The Class B Notes are convertible, in whole or in part, in multiples of $1,000, into GF Class B Preferred Shares at the option of the holder at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date at the conversion ratio in effect on the date of conversion.
The Class B Notes mature ten years from the date of issuance.
However, they automatically convert into GF Class B Preferred Shares upon the earlier of (i) an IPO, (ii) certain change of control transactions of GF or (iii) the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date.
Based on the structure of the transaction and the guidance on accounting for interests in variable interest entities, during 2009, GF was deemed a variable-interest entity, and we were deemed to be the primary beneficiary.
Therefore, we were required to consolidate the accounts of GF from March 2, 2009 through December 26, 2009.
For this period, ATIC’s noncontrolling interest, represented by its equity interests in GF, was presented outside of stockholders’ equity in the consolidated balance sheet due to ATIC’s right to put those securities back to us in the event of a change of control of AMD during the two years following the date of the Closing.
Our net income attributable to common stockholders per share consisted of our consolidated net income, as adjusted for (i) the portion of GF’s losses attributable to ATIC, which was based on ATIC’s proportional ownership interest in GF’s Class A Preferred Shares (17% in 2009), and (ii) the non-cash accretion on GF’s Class B Preferred Shares attributable to us, based on our proportional ownership interest of GF’s Class A Preferred Shares (83% in 2009).
At the Closing, AMD, ATIC and GF also entered into a Shareholders’ Agreement (the Shareholders’ Agreement), a Funding Agreement (the Funding Agreement), and a Wafer Supply Agreement (the WSA), certain terms of which are summarized below.
The Shareholders’ Agreement sets forth the rights and obligations of AMD and ATIC as shareholders of GF.
The initial GF board of directors (GF Board) consisted of eight directors, and AMD and ATIC each designated four directors.
After the Reconciliation Event, the number of directors a GF shareholder may designate increases or decreases according to the percentage of GF’s shares it owns on a fully diluted basis.
We had the right to designate three directors to the GF Board as of December 26, 2009.
If a change of control of AMD occurs after the Reconciliation Event, ATIC will have the option to purchase in cash any or all of the GF securities (valued at their fair market value) held by us and our permitted transferees, ATIC can require us or the other party to the change in control transaction to assume a pro-rata portion of ATIC’s funding commitment under the Funding Agreement until 2013, and ATIC can require the other party to the change in control transaction to guarantee all of our obligations under the transaction documents.
The Funding Agreement provides for the funding of GF and governs the terms and conditions under which ATIC is obligated to provide such funding.
Pursuant to the Funding Agreement, ATIC has committed to additional equity funding of a minimum of $3.6 billion and up to $6.0 billion to be provided in phases over five years from the Closing.
The aggregate amount of equity funding to be provided by the shareholders in any year depends on the time period of such funding and the amounts set forth in the five-year capital plan of GF.
In addition, GF is required to obtain specified third-party debt in any given year, as set forth in its five-year capital plan.
To the extent that GF obtains more than the specified amount of third-party debt, ATIC is able to reduce its funding commitment accordingly.
We have the right, but not the obligation, to provide additional future capital to GF in an amount pro rata to our interest in the fully converted Ordinary Shares of GF.
To the extent we choose not to participate in an equity financing of GF, ATIC is obligated to purchase our share of GF securities, subject to ATIC’s funding commitments under the Funding Agreement.
ATIC’s obligations to provide funding are subject to certain conditions, including the accuracy of GF’s representations and warranties in the Funding Agreement, the absence of a material adverse effect on GF or us and the absence of a material breach or default by GF or us under the provisions of any transaction document.
There are additional funding conditions which are set forth in more detail in the Funding Agreement.
During 2009, ATIC contributed $260 million of cash to GF in exchange for GF securities consisting of $52 million aggregate principal amount of Class A Notes and $208 million aggregate principal amount of Class B Notes.
We declined to participate in the funding.
As of December 26, 2009, our ownership interest in GF was approximately 32% on a fully diluted basis.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, during 2010, we purchased substantially all of our microprocessor unit (MPU) product requirements from GF.
During 2010, we paid GF for wafers on a cost-plus basis.
If we acquire a third-party business that manufactures MPU products, we will have up to two years to transition the manufacture of such MPU products to GF.
In addition, once GF establishes certain specific qualified processes for bulk silicon wafers, we will purchase from GF, where competitive, specified percentages of our GPU requirements.
At our request, GF will also provide sort services to us on a product-by-product basis.
We will provide GF with binding product forecasts of our MPU and GPU product requirements.
The price for GPU products will be determined by the parties when GF is able to begin manufacturing GPU products for us.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider, and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
On December 18, 2009, ATIC International Investment Company (ATIC II) acquired Chartered Semiconductor Manufacturing Ltd. (Chartered).
On December 28, 2009, with our consent, ATIC II, Chartered and GF entered into a Management and Operating Agreement (MOA), which provided for the joint management and operation of GF and Chartered, thereby allowing GF and Chartered to share costs, take advantage of operating synergies and market wafer fabrications services on a collective basis.
In order to allow for the signing of the MOA on December 28, 2009, prior to obtaining any regulatory approvals, we agreed to irrevocably waive rights under the Shareholders Agreement with respect to certain matters that require unanimous GF Board approval.
Additionally, if any such matters came before the GF Board, we agreed that our designated GF directors will vote in the same manner as the majority of ATIC-designated GF Board members voting on any such matters.
As a result of waiving such approval rights, as of December 28, 2009, for financial reporting purposes we no longer shared control with ATIC over GF.
Based on our fully diluted ownership interest in GF, we had the right to designate two directors to the GF Board of Directors as of December 25, 2010.
In June 2009, the FASB issued an amendment to improve financial reporting by enterprises involved with variable interest entities.
This new guidance became effective for us beginning the first day of 2010.
Under the new guidance, the investor who is deemed to both (i) have the power to direct the activities of the variable interest entity that most significantly impact the variable interest entity’s economic performance and (ii) be exposed to losses and returns will be the primary beneficiary who should then consolidate the variable interest entity.
We evaluated whether the governance changes described above would, pursuant to the new guidance, affect our consolidation of GF.
We considered the purpose and design of GF, the activities of GF that most significantly affect the economic performance of GF and the concept of “who has the power,” as contemplated by the new guidance.
Based on the results of this evaluation and in light of the governance changes whereby we believe we only had protective rights relative to the operations of GF, we concluded that the other investor in GF, ATIC, is the party who has the power to direct the activities of GF that most significantly impact GF’s performance and is, therefore, the primary beneficiary of GF.
Accordingly, effective as of December 27, 2009, we deconsolidated GF, and during fiscal 2010 we accounted for our ownership interest in GF under the equity method of accounting.
For purposes of our application of the equity method of accounting during 2010, we recorded our share of GF’s results excluding the results of Chartered because GF did not have an equity ownership interest in Chartered.
The terms of the Funding Agreement and the WSA described above were not affected by the deconsolidation of GF.
Following the deconsolidation, GF became our related party.
Pursuant to each GF funding request from the beginning of 2010 through November 17, 2010, the equity securities issued by GF consisted of 20% of Class A Preferred Shares and 80% of Class B Preferred Shares.
On November 24, 2010, we, ATIC and GF signed a letter agreement regarding future funding of GF.
Pursuant to this letter agreement, the parties agreed that the securities to be issued in consideration of any future GF funding would consist solely of GF’s Class A Preferred Shares.
In addition, the purchase price per Class A Preferred Share would be determined by dividing GF’s net tangible assets (derived from its most recent fiscal year-end audited consolidated balance sheet) by GF’s total number of outstanding preferred shares (assuming the conversion of any outstanding GF Class A Notes into Class A Preferred Shares and Class B Notes into Class B Preferred Shares) as of the date of the balance sheet referred to above and multiplying by 1.10.
Prior to the letter agreement, the funding multiple was 0.90.
During 2010, ATIC contributed $930 million of cash to GF in exchange for GF securities consisting of 444,313 Class A Preferred Shares and 617,695 Class B Preferred Shares.
We did not participate in the fundings.
As a result, our ownership interest in GF’s Class A Preferred Shares decreased from approximately 83% as of December 26, 2009 to approximately 62% as of December 25, 2010, and our ownership interest in GF was approximately 23% on a fully diluted basis.
These contributions resulted in an aggregate gain on our ownership interest dilution of $232 million, which we recorded as part of the equity in net loss of investee line item on our consolidated statement of operations.
On December 27, 2010, pursuant to the Contribution Agreement, ATIC International Investment Company LLC, an affiliate of ATIC, contributed all of the outstanding Ordinary Shares of GFS to GF in exchange for 2,808,981 newly issued shares of GF Class A Preferred Shares.
The issuance of Class A Preferred Shares to ATIC International diluted our ownership interest in GF from 23% to 14% on a fully diluted basis and from 34% to 18% on a voting basis.
As the result of this dilution, during the first quarter of 2011 and the year ended December 31, 2011, we recognized a non-cash gain of approximately $492 million, net of certain transaction related charges, in Equity income (loss) and dilution gain in investee, net.
In connection with our reduced ownership interest in GF, the number of AMD-designated directors on GF’s board decreased from two to one.
In connection with this contribution, we amended and restated the Shareholders’ Agreement and the Funding Agreement.
On December 27, 2010, we amended the Shareholders’ Agreement.
Under the Amended and Restated Shareholders’ Agreement, subject to certain exceptions set forth in the agreement, we have the right to designate one representative to the GF board of directors, which continues for two years following the date on which our ownership in GF, on a fully converted to GF ordinary shares basis, falls below 10%.
Our ownership in GF, on a fully diluted basis, fell below 10% in September 2011.
Therefore, we will no longer be able to designate a representative to the GF board of directors in September 2013.
On December 27, 2010, we amended the Funding Agreement to implement the provisions of the November 24, 2010 letter agreement described above.
Following the GFS contribution and governance changes described above, we assessed our ability to exercise significant influence over GF and considered factors such as our representation on GF’s board of directors, participation in GF’s policy-making processes, material intra- entity transactions, interchange of managerial personnel, technological dependency, and the extent of our ownership in relation to ownership by the other shareholders.
Based on the results of our assessment, we concluded that we no longer had the ability to exercise significant influence over GF.
Accordingly, as of the first quarter of 2011, we changed our method of accounting for our ownership interest in GF from the equity method to the cost method of accounting.
Under the cost method of accounting, we no longer recognize any share of GF’s net income or loss in our consolidated statement of operations.
In addition, we review the carrying value of our investment in GF for impairment at each reporting period.
Impairment indicators, among other factors, include significant deterioration in GF’s earnings performance or business prospects, significant changes in the market conditions in which GF operates, and GF’s ability to continue as a going concern.
GF continues to be a related party of AMD.
Our expenses related to GF’s wafer manufacturing were $904 million and $1.2 billion in 2011 and 2010, respectively.
Our total expenses related to research and development activities were $79 million and $114 million for 2011 and 2010, respectively.
In addition, during the first quarter of 2011, we incurred a charge of $24 million related to a payment to GF, primarily for certain manufacturing assets of GF, which do not benefit us.
During 2011, ATIC contributed $4.4 billion of cash to GF in exchange for GF securities consisting of 4,386,257 Class A Preferred shares.
We did not participate in the fundings.
As a result, our ownership interest in GF’s Class A Preferred shares decreased from approximately 62% as of December 25, 2010, to approximately 12% as of December 31, 2011, and as of December 31, 2011, our ownership interest in GF was 9% on a fully diluted basis.
Since the formation of GF through December 31, 2011, ATIC contributed an aggregate of $5.6 billion of cash to GF in exchange for GF securities.
During the fourth quarter of 2011, we identified indicators of impairment, including revised financial projections which we received from GF.
The fair value of our GF investment was determined by a valuation analysis of GF’s Class A Preferred Shares, utilizing the revised financial projections.
We concluded the decline in fair value is other than temporary.
As a result of the valuation analysis, we recorded a non- cash impairment charge of approximately $209 million, based on the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the investment as of December 31, 2011.
As of December 31, 2011, our investment balance in GF after impairment was $278 million.
On April 2, 2011, we amended the WSA.
The primary effect of the amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors, including APU products.
The amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
Pursuant to the amendment, GF committed to provide us with, and we committed to purchase, a fixed number of 45nm and 32nm wafers per quarter in 2011.
We paid GF a fixed price for 45nm wafers delivered in 2011.
Our price for 32nm wafers varied based on the wafer volumes and manufacturing yield of such wafers and was based on good die.
In addition, we also agreed to pay an additional quarterly amount to GF during 2012 totaling up to $430 million if GF met specified conditions related to continued availability of 32nm capacity as of the beginning of 2012.
Under the current terms of the WSA, in 2012, we will compensate GF on a cost plus basis for projected manufacturing capacity that we have requested for our microprocessors, including APU products.
However, we are currently in the process of negotiating a second amendment to the WSA, including the pricing methodology.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Although actual results have historically been reasonably consistent with management’s expectations, actual results may differ from these estimates or our estimates may be affected by different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
We record a provision for estimated sales returns and allowances on product sales for estimated future price reductions and other customer incentives in the same period that the related revenues are recorded.
We base these estimates on actual historical sales returns, allowances, historical price reductions, market activity, and other known or anticipated trends and factors.
These estimates are subject to management’s judgment, and actual provisions could be different from our estimates and current provisions, resulting in future adjustments to our revenues and operating results.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence.
This evaluation includes analysis of sales levels by product and projections of future demand.
These projections assist us in determining the carrying value of our inventory.
Generally, inventories on hand in excess of forecasted demand for the next two quarters are not valued.
In addition, we write off inventories that are considered obsolete.
We adjust the remaining specific inventory balances to approximate the lower of our standard manufacturing cost or market value.
Among other factors, management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining obsolescence and net realizable value.
If, in any period, we anticipate future demand or market conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of sales in the period the revision is made.
This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period.
If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written off in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales, resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment present.
We perform the annual goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year.
We evaluate whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level by first determining whether the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value and, if so, by determining whether the implied fair value of goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value.
The implied fair value of goodwill is determined through the application of one or more valuation models common to our industry, including the income, market and cost approaches.
While market valuation data for comparable companies is gathered and analyzed, we believe that there has not been sufficient comparability between the peer groups and the specific reporting units to allow for the derivation of reliable indications of value using a market approach.
Therefore, we have ultimately employed the income approach which requires estimates of future operating results and cash flows of each of the reporting units, discounted using estimated discount rates.
The key assumptions we have used to determine the fair value of our reporting units includes projected cash flows for the next 10 years and discount rates ranging from 15% to 30%.
Discount rates are based on our weighted average cost of capital, adjusted for the risks associated with operations.
A variance in the discount rate could have a significant impact on the amount of the goodwill impairment charge recorded, if any.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2011 and 2010, each reporting unit’s fair values exceeded their carrying values by a significant amount, indicating that there was no goodwill impairment.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets including Acquired Intangible Assets.
We consider quarterly whether indicators of impairment of long- lived assets and intangible assets are present.
These indicators may include, but are not limited to, significant decreases in the market value of an asset and significant changes in the extent or manner in which an asset is used.
If these or other indicators are present, we test for recoverability of the asset by determining whether the estimated undiscounted cash flows attributable to the assets in question are less than their carrying value.
If less, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount of the assets over their respective fair values.
Fair value is determined through discounted future cash flows, appraisals or other methods.
Significant judgment is involved in estimating future cash flows and deriving the discount rate to apply to the estimated future cash flows, and in evaluating the results of appraisals or other valuation methods.
For example, in recent analyses performed, discount rates have ranged from 18% to 32%, but this may not be indicative of future analyses.
If the asset determined to be impaired is to be held and used, we recognize an impairment loss through a charge to our operating results, which also reduces the carrying basis of the related asset.
The new carrying value of the related asset is depreciated or amortized over the remaining estimated useful life of the asset.
We also must make subjective judgments regarding the remaining useful life of the asset.
We may incur additional impairment losses in future periods if factors influencing our estimates of the undiscounted cash flows change.
For assets held for sale, impairment losses are measured at the lower of the carrying amount of the assets or the fair value of the assets less costs to sell.
For assets to be disposed of other than by sale, impairment losses are measured as their carrying amount less salvage value, if any, at the time the assets cease to be used.
In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for tax and financial statement reporting purposes.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets.
If recovery is not likely, we must increase our charge to income tax expense, in the form of a valuation allowance, for the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
We consider past performance, future expected taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance.
In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the Internal Revenue Service or other taxing jurisdiction.
If our estimates of these taxes are greater or less than actual results, an additional tax benefit or charge will result.
We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as interest expense and income tax expense, respectively.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, the primary factors that resulted in those changes and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
We review and assess operating performance using segment net revenues and operating income (loss) before interest, other income (expense), net, equity income (loss) and dilution gain in investee, net and income taxes.
These performance measures include the allocation of expenses to the operating segments based on management’s judgment.
In the first quarter of 2009, as a result of the formation of GF, we began reviewing and assessing operating performance using the following reportable segments: the Computing Solutions segment, which included microprocessors, chipsets and embedded processors and related revenue; the Graphics segment, which included graphics, video and multimedia products and related revenue as well as revenue received in connection with the development and sale of game console systems that incorporate our graphics technology; and the Foundry segment, which included operating results attributable to front end wafer manufacturing operations and related activities, including the operating results of GF, from March 2, 2009 to December 26, 2009.
In addition to these reportable segments, we had an All Other category, which was not a reportable segment.
This category included certain expenses and credits that were not allocated to any of the operating segments because management did not consider these expenses and credits in evaluating the performance of the operating segments.
These expenses were non-Foundry segment related expenses and included employee stock-based compensation expense, restructuring charges and amortization of acquired intangible assets.
We also reported the results of the Handheld business unit in the All Other category because the operating results of this business unit were not material.
We also had an Intersegment Eliminations category, which was also not a reportable segment.
This category included intersegment eliminations for revenue, cost of sales and profits on inventory related to transactions between the Computing Solutions segment and the Foundry segment.
Beginning in the first quarter of 2010, as a result of the deconsolidation of GF, we no longer had a Foundry segment or an Intersegment Eliminations category.
We began reviewing and assessing operating performance using the following reportable segments: the Computing Solutions segment, which includes microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an APU, chipsets, and embedded microprocessors, embedded GPUs and related revenue; and the Graphics segment, which includes graphics, video and multimedia products and related revenue as well as revenue received in connection with the development and sale of game console systems that incorporate our graphics technology.
We continue to have an All Other category, as described above.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending last Saturday in December.
The years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 included 53 weeks, 52 weeks and 52 weeks, respectively.
However, the extra week in 2011 did not have a material impact on our results of operations.
References in this report to 2011, 2010 and 2009 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The following table provides a summary of net revenue and operating income (loss) by segment and income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes for 2011, 2010 and 2009.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes Computing Solutions net revenue of $5.0 billion in 2011 increased 4% compared to net revenue of $4.8 billion in 2010, primarily as a result of a 16% increase in unit shipments partially offset by an 11% decrease in average selling price.
The increase in unit shipments was attributable to an increase in unit shipments of our microprocessors, including APU products for mobile devices, as well as our chipset products.
Unit shipments of our microprocessors, including APU products for mobile devices increased due to strong demand for our Brazos and Llano-based APU platforms.
However, the increase in unit shipments in 2011 was limited by supply constraints with respect to certain microprocessor products manufactured using the 32nm technology node.
Chipset unit shipments increased primarily due to an increase in overall unit shipments of our microprocessor products.
The decrease in overall average selling price was primarily attributable to a decrease in the average selling price of our microprocessors for servers due to a shift in our product mix and competitive market conditions as well as sales of our Brazos APU platforms, which have a lower average selling price than our other processor products.
Computing Solutions net revenue of $4.8 billion in 2010 increased 16% compared to net revenue of $4.2 billion in 2009, primarily as a result of an 18% increase in unit shipments partially offset by a 2% decrease in average selling price.
The increase in unit shipments was attributable to an increase in unit shipments of our microprocessor products for mobile devices as well as chipset products, resulting primarily from an improved economic environment.
In addition, chipset unit shipments increased as customers increasingly adopted our chipsets with our microprocessor products, while unit shipments of our microprocessors for mobile devices increased due to increased demand from existing and new customers for our new notebook platforms.
Average selling price decreased due to a decrease in average selling price of embedded processors, partially offset by an increase in average selling price of our chipsets and microprocessor products.
Average selling price of embedded processors decreased due to a shift in our product mix to lower-end, legacy products.
Average selling price of microprocessor products increased due to a favorable shift in our product mix to higher end microprocessors, especially for servers, as customers continued to transition to our AMD Opteron™ 6000 series server platforms.
Average selling price of our chipset products increased primarily due to a shift in product mix.
Computing Solutions operating income was $556 million in 2011 compared to $529 million in 2010.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $70 million increase in cost of sales, a $45 million increase in research and development expenses and a $42 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
Cost of sales increased primarily due to higher microprocessor and chipsets unit shipments and the absence of a one-time benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF in 2010.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Computing Solutions operating income was $529 million in 2010 compared to $142 million in 2009.
The improvement was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above and a $25 million decrease in cost of sales, partially offset by a $224 million increase in research and development expenses and a $61 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
Cost of sales decreased due to reductions in manufacturing costs and a one-time benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF in 2010.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Graphics net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2011 decreased by 6% compared to net revenue of $1.7 billion in 2010.
The decrease was due to a 6% decrease in net revenue from sales of GPU products.
Net revenue from sales of GPU products decreased primarily due to a decrease in both GPU unit shipments and average selling price.
The decrease in GPU unit shipments was primarily due to lower customer demand which we believe was due in part to the disruption in the supply of hard disk drives caused by the flooding in Thailand at the beginning of 2011.
GPU average selling price decreased due to a shift in our product mix to lower end GPU products.
Graphics net revenue of $1.7 billion in 2010 increased 43% compared to net revenue of $1.2 billion in 2009.
The increase was due to a 49% increase in net revenue from sales of GPU products.
Net revenue from sales of GPU products increased primarily due to an increase in both GPU unit shipments and average selling price.
Unit shipments increased due to strong demand for our DX 11® —ATI Radeon™ products.
However, the increase was limited by supply constraints primarily related to constrained wafer foundry capacity in the first half of 2010.
Supply constraints improved in the third quarter of 2010, and we did not experience any supply constraints during the fourth quarter of 2010.
GPU average selling price increased due to a shift in our product mix to higher end GPU products.
Graphics operating income was $51 million in 2011 compared to $149 million in 2010.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above and a $20 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $25 million decrease in cost of sales.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower GPU shipments and correspondingly lower manufacturing costs.
Graphics operating income was $149 million in 2010 compared to $35 million in 2009.
The improvement was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $345 million increase in cost of sales due to higher GPU unit shipments, a $22 million increase in research and development expenses and a $15 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Foundry net revenue was $1.1 billion in 2009.
Foundry operating loss was $433 million in 2009.
In 2011 and 2010, we did not have a Foundry segment.
All Other revenue was immaterial in 2011, $14 million in 2010 and $66 million in 2009.
All Other revenue declined because as of 2009, we no longer developed new Handheld products.
We decided to exit the Handheld business after selling certain graphics and multimedia technology assets and intellectual property to Qualcomm in the first quarter of 2009.
All Other operating loss of $239 million in 2011 included $98 million in restructuring charges, net, $90 million of stock-based compensation expense, $29 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF primarily related to certain GF manufacturing assets that did not benefit us.
All Other operating income of $170 million in 2010 included $283 million of income from the settlement of our litigation with Samsung in the fourth quarter of 2010, a $30 million one-time benefit recognized in the first quarter of 2010 related to the deconsolidation of GF, and $14 million of net revenue, partially offset by $87 million of stock-based compensation expense and $61 million related to the amortization of acquired intangible assets, All Other operating income of $968 million in 2009 included $1.2 billion of income from the settlement of our litigation with Intel in the fourth quarter of 2009 and $66 million of net revenue, partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $69 million, $65 million in restructuring charges, net, $55 million of cost of sales, $46 million in research and development expenses and $32 million in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
Intersegment eliminations represent eliminations during consolidation in revenue and in cost of sales and profits on inventory between the Computing Solutions segment and the Foundry segment.
For 2009, intersegment eliminations of revenue were $1.1 billion and intersegment eliminations of cost of sales and profits on inventory were $48 million.
In 2011 and 2010, we did not have an Intersegment Eliminations category.
The following is a summary of certain consolidated statement of operations data for 2011, 2010 and 2009.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 45% in 2011 compared to 46% in 2010.
Gross margin in 2011 included a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF for certain GF manufacturing assets and a charge of approximately $5 million related to a legal settlement.
Gross margin in 2010 included a $69 million benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF.
Absent the effects of these events, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 45% in each of 2011 and 2010.
Gross margin, as adjusted for the factors described above, remained flat in 2011 compared to 2010.
During 2011, unit shipments of our low- cost, margin accretive Brazos APU platforms increased compared to 2010.
However, this improvement in gross margin was offset by an unfavorable mix in supply of microprocessor products manufactured using the 32nm technology node and a decline in average selling price of our microprocessor products for servers.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 46% in 2010 compared to 42% in 2009.
Gross margin in 2010 included the $69 million benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF.
Gross margin in 2009 included $159 million attributable to the Foundry segment and Intersegment Eliminations related to profits on inventory and a $171 million benefit related to the sale of inventory that had been written-down in the fourth quarter of 2008.
The factors that led to the sale of the inventory that was previously written down were the stabilization of the overall macroeconomic environment and improved business conditions in 2009 compared to the end of 2008, which led to an increase in end-user demand for PCs and, correspondingly, an increase in customer orders for, and shipments of, our products.
Absent the effects of these events, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 45% in 2010 compared to 36% in 2009.
The improvement in gross margin, as adjusted for the factors described above, was primarily attributable to an improvement in our manufacturing costs, including our utilization of GF’s manufacturing facilities, and higher average selling price for microprocessors and GPUs due to a favorable shift in product mix.
During 2009, we recorded grants and allowances GF received from the State of Saxony and the Federal Republic of Germany in connection with GF’s manufacturing facilities in Dresden, Germany as long-term liabilities on our consolidated financial statements.
We amortized these amounts as they were earned as a reduction to operating expenses.
The amortization of the production related grants and allowances were recorded as a credit to cost of sales.
The credit to cost of sales totaled $46 million in 2009.
The fluctuations in the recognition of these credits did not significantly impact our consolidated gross margins.
With the deconsolidation of GF as of the beginning of 2010, our consolidated financial statements no longer directly reflected such credits to cost of sales.
However, these credits had a favorable impact on the amounts that we paid GF pursuant to the WSA in 2010.
Research and development expenses of $1.5 billion in 2011, increased by $48 million, or 3%, compared to $1.4 billion in 2010.
The increase was primarily due to a $45 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment as a result of a $79 million increase in product engineering and design costs for our future products, partially offset by a $27 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense and a $7 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses related to GF for our future products.
Research and development expenses of $1.4 billion in 2010, decreased by $316 million, or 18%, compared to $1.7 billion in 2009.
In 2009, research and development expenses included $524 million in research and development expenses related to the Foundry segment.
Without taking into account the research and development expenses attributable to the Foundry segment, which are not indicative of our ongoing performance, research and development expenses would have increased by $208 million in 2010 as compared to 2009.
This increase was due to a $224 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $22 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics segment, partially offset by a $38 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our All Other category.
The increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment was primarily due to a $91 million increase in product engineering and design costs for our future products, a $68 million increase in employee compensation and benefit expense and a $64 million increase in manufacturing process technology expenses related to GF for our future products.
The increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics segment was primarily due to a $33 million increase in employee compensation and benefit expense, partially offset by a $13 million decrease in product engineering and design costs due to lower material costs used in 2010.
The decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our All Other category was primarily due to lower research and development expenses related to handheld products because we no longer develop these products.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $992 million in 2011, increased by $58 million, or 6%, compared to $934 million in 2010.
The increase was primarily due to a $42 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $20 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics segment.
The increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment was primarily due to a $41 million increase in sales and marketing activities resulting from an increase in regional marketing programs and labor expenses and a $14 million increase in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $12 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense.
The increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses in our Graphics segment was primarily due to a $22 million increase in sales and marketing activities resulting from an increase in regional marketing programs and labor expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $934 million in 2010, decreased by $60 million, or 6%, compared to $994 million in 2009.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses in 2009 included $116 million attributable to the Foundry segment.
Without taking into account the marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to the Foundry segment, which are not indicative of our ongoing performance, marketing, general and administrative expenses would have increased by $56 million.
This increase was due to a $61 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $15 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics segment, partially offset by a $21 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our All Other category.
The increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses in our Computing Solutions segment was primarily due to a $101 million increase in sales and marketing activities, a $26 million increase in employee compensation and benefit expenses, a $15 million increase in labor expenses and a $7 million increase in other general and administrative expenses.
These increases were partially offset by an $88 million decrease in legal expenses following our settlement with Intel in 2009.
The increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics segment was primarily due to a $15 million increase in employee benefit and compensation expenses and other general and administrative expenses.
The decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to the All Other category was mainly due to the absence of $21 million of expenses incurred in connection with the formation of GF in the first quarter of 2009.
In the fourth quarter of 2010, we entered into a Patent License and Settlement Agreement with Samsung to end all outstanding legal disputes related to pending patent litigation between us and Samsung.
Pursuant to this agreement, all claims between the parties were dismissed with prejudice and Samsung agreed to pay us $283 million less any withholding taxes.
We received the first payment of $119 million (which represents $143 million less withholding taxes) in December 2010.
The remaining amount of $117 million (which represents $140 million less withholding taxes) was paid in two equal installments in May 2011 and in November 2011.
In addition, pursuant to the settlement agreement, Samsung granted us, and we granted to Samsung, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all patents and patent applications for ten years after the effective date of the Agreement to make, have made, use, sell, offer to sell, import and otherwise dispose of certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products anywhere in the world.
This settlement encompassed all patent litigation and disputes between the parties.
At the time we entered into the Agreement, we did not have any future obligations that we were required to perform in order to earn this settlement payment.
Accordingly, we recognized the entire settlement amount in our operating results for the fourth quarter of 2010.
In the fourth quarter of 2009, we entered into an agreement with Intel to end all outstanding legal disputes between us and Intel, including antitrust litigation and patent cross license disputes.
Under the terms of the agreement: AMD and Intel agreed to a new 5-year patent cross license agreement that gives AMD broad rights and the freedom to operate a business utilizing multiple foundries; Intel and AMD waived all claims of breach from the previous license agreement; Intel agreed to abide by a set of business practice provisions going forward; we dropped all pending litigation, including a case in U.S. District Court in Delaware and two cases pending in Japan; and we withdrew all of our regulatory complaints worldwide.
This settlement encompasses all past antitrust litigation and disputes between us and Intel.
At the time we entered into the agreement, we did not have any future obligations that we were required to perform to earn this settlement payment.
That is, the patent cross license agreement represented fully paid up licenses by both AMD and Intel for which no future payments or delivery was required.
Accordingly, we recognized the entire settlement amount in our 2009 operating results.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $29 million in 2011, $61 million in 2010 and $70 million in 2009.
The decrease from 2009 to 2010 and from 2010 to 2011 was due to the reduced amortization base amount of the acquired intangible assets.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we initiated a restructuring plan to strengthen our competitive positioning, implement a more competitive cost structure and conduct a workforce rebalancing to better address faster growing market segments.
The plan primarily involved a reduction of our global workforce by approximately 10% and contract and program terminations.
The plan also involved additional cost reduction actions that will take place in 2012.
We expect that the 2011 restructuring plan will be substantially completed during 2012.
We recorded a $100 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter of 2011, which consisted of $54 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, $45 million for contract or program termination costs and $1 million for asset impairments.
Of the $100 million restructuring charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2011, we expect approximately $52 million in cash expenditures in 2012 and approximately $15 million in cash expenditures in 2013.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we also reversed approximately $2 million of costs associated with our 2008 restructuring plan because the actual restoration costs for vacated facilities were lower than previously estimated.
In addition, we currently estimate that we will record restructuring expense in 2012 of approximately $5 million.
Of this amount, approximately $4 million is related to severance and costs of continuation of certain employee benefits and approximately $1 million is related to facility site closures, substantially all of which we expect to pay in 2012.
The following table provides a summary of the fourth quarter of 2011 restructuring activities and the related liabilities recorded in “Other current liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet remaining as of December 31, 2011: In the fourth quarter of 2008, we initiated a restructuring plan to reduce our cost structure, which was substantially completed in 2009.
This plan primarily involved the termination of employees.
The restructuring charges recorded in conjunction with this plan primarily represented severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, contract or program termination costs, asset impairments and exit costs for facility consolidations and closures.
The following table provides a summary of each major type of cost associated with the 2011 and 2008 restructuring plans for the periods presented: Interest income of $10 million in 2011 was relatively flat as compared to $11 million in 2010.
The weighted-average interest rate decreased in 2011 compared to 2010.
However, the impact of this was offset by an increase in average cash balance during 2011.
Interest income of $11 million in 2010 decreased by $5 million from $16 million in 2009, primarily due to the absence of $4 million of GF interest income.
GF interest income is not reflected in our results of operations in 2010 as a result of the deconsolidation of GF.
Total interest charges of $180 million in 2011 decreased by $19 million from $199 million in 2010.
Interest expense decreased primarily due to the net reduction in the principal amount of our outstanding debt.
Total interest charges of $199 million in 2010 decreased by $240 million from $439 million in 2009.
Of this decrease, $153 million was attributable to the deconsolidation of GF and $77 million was attributable to a net reduction in the principal amount of our outstanding debt.
Other expense, net in 2011 was $199 million compared to $311 million of other income, net in 2010 and $166 million of other income, net in 2009.
In 2011, we recognized an impairment charge on our investment in GF of approximately $209 million and a $6 million loss related to our repurchase of $200 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes, partially offset by $8 million gain on foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
In 2010, we recognized a one-time, non-cash gain related to the deconsolidation of GF of approximately $325 million, a $17 million gain from the sale of our marketable securities and an $8 million gain related to an earn-out payment that we received in connection with the acquisition of a company that we had invested in, partially offset by a $24 million loss related to our repurchase of $1,016 million principal amount of our 6.00% Notes and $14 million loss due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
In 2009, we repurchased $344 million principal amount of our 6.00% Notes, resulting in a gain of $174 million, and we repurchased $1,015 million principal amount of our 5.75% Notes, resulting in a gain of $6 million.
In addition, we recognized a gain of $15 million on settlement of a liability related to certain foreign currency exchange contracts, a gain of $28 million on the sale of certain Handheld assets, and a $25 million gain from a class action legal settlement with DRAM manufacturers.
These gains were partially offset by a $27 million foreign exchange loss, a $17 million charge for real estate transfer taxes in connection with the GF manufacturing joint venture transaction and a $10 million charge related to the AMTC joint venture.
During 2009, we also redeemed the remaining outstanding principal amount of our 7.75% Notes resulting in a net loss of $11 million and recorded other than temporary impairment charge of $3 million relating to our investment in Spansion Inc. We recorded an income tax benefit of $4 million in 2011 and an income tax provision of $38 million and $112 million in 2010 and 2009, respectively.
The income tax benefit in 2011 was primarily due to tax benefits of $4 million from the monetization of U.S. and Canadian tax credits, a The income tax provision in 2010 was primarily due to withholding taxes paid to the Korean tax authorities in connection with the payment we received from Samsung in December 2010 pursuant to the Patent License and Settlement Agreement as well as foreign taxes in profitable locations offset by benefits, including the monetization of U.S. research and development credits, an alternative minimum tax refund on net operating loss carryback in the United States and the reversal of unrecognized tax benefits in foreign jurisdictions.
The income tax provision in 2009 was primarily due to a one-time loss of deferred tax assets for German net operating loss carryovers upon transfer of our ownership interests in our Dresden subsidiaries to GF plus foreign taxes in profitable locations offset by discrete tax benefits, including the monetization of U.S. research and development credits.
As of December 31, 2011, substantially all of our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, continued to be subject to a valuation allowance.
The realization of these assets is dependent on substantial future taxable income which, at December 31, 2011, in management’s estimate, is not more likely than not to be achieved.
During the time that we applied the equity method of accounting for our ownership interest in GF, our equity in net loss of investee primarily consisted of our proportionate share of GF’s losses for the period based on our ownership percentage of GF’s Class A Preferred Shares, our portion of the non-cash accretion on GF’s Class B Preferred Shares, the elimination of intercompany profit, reflecting the mark-up on inventory that remained on our consolidated balance sheet at the end of the period, the amortization of basis differences identified from the purchase price allocation process, based on the fair value of GF upon deconsolidation and, to the extent applicable, the gain or loss on dilution of our ownership interest as a result of the capital infusion into GF by ATIC.
Stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units for the years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 was allocated in our consolidated statements of operations as follows: Total stock-based compensation expense, net of tax of $0 During 2011, 2010 and 2009, we did not realize any excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation and therefore we did not record any related financing cash flows.
Stock-based compensation expenses of $90 million in 2011 increased $3 million compared to $87 million in 2010.
This increase was primarily due to the acceleration of vesting of all unvested equity awards held by our former Chief Executive Officer in the first quarter of 2011 as a result of his resignation from AMD, effective January 10, 2011, and a higher number of employee stock options and restricted stock units granted in 2011 compared to 2010, partially offset by a lower average grant date fair value in 2011 as compared to 2010.
Stock-based compensation expenses of $87 million in 2010 increased $12 million compared to $75 million in 2009.
This increase was primarily due to a higher average grant date fair value in 2010 as compared to 2009.
As of December 31, 2011, we had $21 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to stock options that will be recognized over the weighted average period of 2.08 years.
Also, as of December 31, 2011, we had $103 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to restricted stock and restricted stock units that will be recognized over the weighted average period of 1.79 years.
International sales as a percentage of net revenue were 93% in 2011, 88% in 2010 and 87% in 2009.
We expect that international sales will continue to be a significant portion of total sales in the foreseeable future.
Substantially all of our sales transactions were denominated in As of December 31, 2011, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances remained relatively flat at $1.8 billion when compared to cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 25, 2010.
During 2011, we invested $149 million in long-term marketable securities, which we intend to hold for more than one year, and do not intend to use in current operations.
Our long-term marketable securities are invested in corporate bonds and money market funds that have maximum stated maturities of 2 years.
As of December 31, 2011, the fair value of these long-term marketable securities was $149 million.
As of December 31, 2011, our debt and capital lease obligations were $2 billion, which reflects a debt discount adjustment of $75 million on our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes.
We have classified this amount as current portion of long term debt on our balance sheet.
We may elect to refinance the outstanding amount of our 5.75% Notes, or to purchase or otherwise retire the outstanding amount of our 5.75% Notes in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries.
Otherwise, we will pay off the outstanding amount of our 5.75% Notes at maturity.
For 2011, our adjusted free cash flow was $528 million.
Adjusted free cash flow is a non-GAAP measure, which we calculated by taking GAAP net cash provided by operating activities of $382 million and adding an amount of $396 million, which represents payments made by certain of our distributor customers during 2011 to IBM Credit LLC and certain of its subsidiaries (collectively, the IBM Parties) pursuant to our former accounts receivable financing arrangement among AMD, certain AMD subsidiaries and the IBM Parties, which we describe in further detail below.
We adjusted the resulting amount of $778 million by subtracting capital expenditures, which were $250 million for 2011.
When compared to adjusted free cash flow of $355 million in 2010, the increase was attributable to a higher GAAP net cash provided by operating activities, which increased by $794 million, partially offset by an increase of $102 million in capital expenditures, and a decrease of $519 million in payments made by our distributor customers to the IBM Parties in 2011 as compared to 2010.
Our capital expenditures increased in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to the implementation of a financial transformation project to improve operational efficiency and also due to the acquisition of a new data center.
We terminated our financing arrangement with the IBM Parties in February 2011.
We did not make any adjustments to GAAP net cash provided by operating activities related to this financing arrangement in the third or fourth quarters of 2011 because there were no outstanding invoices, and we do not intend to do so in future periods.
We had various supplier agreements with the IBM Parties pursuant to which we sold invoices of selected distributor customers.
Under this financing arrangement, we did not recognize revenue until our distributors sold our products to their customers.
Under GAAP, we classified funds received from the IBM Parties as debt on the balance sheet.
Moreover, for cash flow purposes, we classified these funds as cash flows from financing activities.
When a distributor paid the applicable IBM Party, we reduced the distributor’s accounts receivable and the corresponding debt, resulting in a non-cash accounting entry.
Because we did not receive the cash from the distributor to reduce the accounts receivable, the distributor’s payment was never reflected in our cash flows from operating activities.
Generally, under GAAP, the reduction in accounts receivable is assumed to be a source of operating cash flow.
Therefore, we believe that treating the payments from our distributor customers to the IBM Parties as if we actually received the cash from the distributor and then used that cash to pay down the debt to the IBM Parties was more reflective of the economic substance of the financing arrangement with the IBM Parties.
We calculate and communicate adjusted free cash flow because our management believes it is important for investors to understand the nature of these cash flows.
Our calculation of adjusted free cash flow may or may not be consistent with the calculation of this measure by other companies in the same industry.
Investors should not view adjusted free cash flow as an alternative to GAAP liquidity measures of cash flows from operating or financing activities.
We believe that cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances as of December 31, 2011, anticipated cash flow from operations and available external financing will be sufficient to fund operations, including capital expenditures over the next twelve months.
We believe that in the event we require additional funding, we will be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives.
However, given the possibility of changes in market conditions or other occurrences, we cannot be certain that such funding will be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
Over the longer term, should additional funding be required, such as to meet payment obligations of our long-term debt when due, we may need to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities, which may be issued from time to time under an effective registration statement, through the issuance of securities in a transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
Uncertain global economic conditions have in the past and may in the future adversely impact our business.
We cannot assure you that conditions will improve, and they could worsen.
If market conditions do not improve or deteriorate, we may be limited in our ability to access the capital markets to meet liquidity needs, on favorable terms or at all, which could adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition, including our ability to refinance maturing liabilities.
As a result of the uncertainties in the credit markets as mentioned above, all of our auction rate securities (ARS) were negatively affected and auctions for these securities failed to settle on their respective settlement dates since February 2008.
However, there have been no defaults, and we have received all interest payments as they became due.
During 2011, we received proceeds of $21 million upon the redemption of ARS that had a carrying value of $19 million.
As of December 31, 2011, the par value of our ARS was $45 million, with an estimated fair value of $38 million.
Total ARS, at fair value, represented 2% of our total investment portfolio as of December 31, 2011.
Based on the recent tender and redemption activities and the fact that the secondary market for these securities has become more liquid, with pricing generally similar to our carrying value, we classified these securities as marketable securities as of December 31, 2011.
We have the intent and believe we have the ability to sell these securities within the next 12 months.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $382 million in 2011.
Net income of $491 million was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of $317 million of depreciation and amortization expense, a $209 million impairment charge on our investment in GF, $90 million of stock based compensation expense, and $21 million of interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and our 8.125% Notes.
These charges were partially offset by recognition of a one-time, non-cash gain of $492 million due to the dilution of our equity interest in GF.
The net changes in operating assets at December 31, 2011 compared to December 25, 2010 included an increase in accounts receivable of $347 million, which included the non-cash impact of our previous financing arrangements with the IBM Parties.
During 2011, the IBM Parties collected approximately $396 million from our distributor customers pursuant to these arrangements.
Without considering the collection by the IBM Parties of the accounts receivables that we sold to them, our accounts receivable decreased $49 million.
This decrease was primarily due to timing of sales and collections during 2011.
There was also a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $115 million primarily due to the receipt of the final settlement payment from Samsung of $117 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $412 million in 2010.
Net income of $471 million was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of a $462 million loss from the application of the equity method of accounting for our investment in GF, $383 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $87 million of stock-based compensation expense, $30 million of interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and our 8.125% Notes and a $24 million net loss related to our repurchase of an aggregate of $1,016 million principal amount of our 6.00% Notes for $1,011 million in cash.
These charges were partially offset by a one-time, non-cash gain of $325 million related to the deconsolidation of GF, amortization of foreign grants of $16 million and a net gain of $17 million from the sale of marketable securities.
The net changes in operating assets at December 25, 2010 compared to December 26, 2009 included an increase in accounts receivable of $1,138 million, which included the non-cash impact of our financing arrangement with the IBM Parties.
During 2010, the IBM Parties collected approximately $915 million from our distributor customers pursuant to these arrangements.
Without considering the collection by the IBM Parties of the accounts receivables that we sold to them, our accounts receivable increased $223 million.
This increase was primarily due to the introduction and sale of new products towards the end of 2010 and the timing of the related collections.
Excluding the effects of the deconsolidation of GF, there was also a decrease in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other of $184 million, primarily due to the timing of payments.
Accounts payable to GF increased by $55 million due to the timing of payments during 2010.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $473 million in 2009, which included $1.2 billion from the settlement of our litigation with Intel.
Net income of $293 million was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of $1.1 billion of depreciation and amortization expense, $121 million of interest expense primarily related to GF’s Class A Notes and Class B Notes and our 6.00% Notes, $75 million of stock-based compensation expense, a $28 million net loss from the sale and disposal of property, plant and equipment and an $11 million net loss primarily related to the redemption of all of our 7.75% Senior Notes due 2012.
These charges were offset by a net gain of $180 million related to our repurchase of an aggregate of $344 million principal amount of our 6.00% Notes for $161 million in cash and $1,015 million principal amount of our 5.75% Notes for $1,002 million in cash, amortization of foreign grants and allowances of $110 million and a gain of $28 million from the sale of certain Handheld assets.
The net changes in operating assets at December 26, 2009 compared to December 27, 2008 included an increase in accounts receivable of $960 million.
During 2009, the IBM Parties collected approximately $535 million from our distributor customers pursuant to the financial arrangement described above.
Without considering the collections by the IBM Parties of the accounts receivables that we sold to them, the increase in accounts receivable was $425 million.
This increase was primarily due to timing of sales and collections during 2009.
There was also a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $105 million, primarily due to lower purchases reflecting the effect of our cost cutting efforts and timing of payments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $113 million in 2011.
We had a net cash outflow of $234 million for the purchase and sale of property, plant and equipment, and payments of $17 million for professional services related to the contribution of GFS to GF.
The net cash outflows were partially offset by a net cash inflow of $140 million for purchase, sale, and maturity of available-for-sale securities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.1 billion in 2010.
The cash flow effect of the deconsolidation of GF was an outflow of $904 million, which consisted of GF’s cash and cash equivalents.
In addition, we had a net cash outflow of $147 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment and of $160 million for purchases of available-for-sale securities.
The net cash outflows were partially offset by a net cash inflow of $69 million from the sale of trading securities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.3 billion in 2009 primarily as a result of a net cash outflow of $883 million for the purchase of available-for-sale securities and $466 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment, of which $394 million related to property, plant and equipment attributable to the Foundry segment.
This was partially offset by $58 million of proceeds from sale of certain Handheld assets and $14 million of proceeds from the maturity of trading securities.
Net cash used in financing activities was $6 million in 2011 as a result of payments of $202 million to repurchase $200 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
This amount was partially offset by $170 million of proceeds from our former financing arrangement with the IBM parties, $20 million in proceeds from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD Fusion products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities, and $18 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
During 2011, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any related financing cash flows.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $484 million in 2010 primarily as a result of proceeds of $988 million from our former financing arrangement with the IBM Parties, $490 million from the sale and issuance of $500 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.75% Notes, $19 million in proceeds from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our Fusion products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities and $15 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
These amounts were partially offset by payments of $1,011 million to repurchase $1,016 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
During 2010, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any related financing cash flows.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.5 billion in 2009 primarily as a result of proceeds of $2.3 billion from the issuance of GF’s Class A Notes, Class B Notes, Class A Preferred Shares and Class B Preferred Shares, of which $1.6 billion constituted cash proceeds to GF, proceeds of $605 million from our former financing arrangement with the IBM Parties, proceeds of $440 million from the issuance of $500 million aggregate principle of 8.125% Notes, proceeds of $15 million from a revolving credit line between our subsidiary in China and China Merchant Bank, proceeds of $125 million from the sale of 58 million shares of AMD common stock and warrants to purchase 35 million shares of AMD common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share to WCH in connection with the formation of the GF manufacturing joint venture, and proceeds from grants and allowances from the Federal Republic of Germany and the State of Saxony of $55 million for GF’s Dresden manufacturing facilities.
These amounts were partially offset by payments to Leipziger Messe of $180 million to repurchase its partnership interests in our former subsidiary in Dresden, Germany, AMD Fab 36 KG, $67 million related to the guaranteed rate of return on these partnership interests and $10 million related to a call option premium to Leipziger Messe for the early repurchase of these partnership interests.
Net cash provided by financing activities was also partially offset by $1.8 billion of payments on certain debt and capital lease obligations, primarily consisting of $1,002 million to repurchase $1,015 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.75% Notes, $398 million to redeem $390 million aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Senior Notes due 2012 and $161 million to repurchase $344 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
During 2009, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any related financing cash flows.
The following table summarizes our consolidated principal contractual cash obligations, as of December 31, 2011, and is supplemented by the discussion following the table: Represents aggregate principal amount of the notes, without the effect of associated discounts.
Represents estimated aggregate interest obligations for our outstanding debt obligations that are payable in cash, excluding capital lease obligations.
Also excludes non-cash amortization of debt discounts on the 8.125% Notes and the 6.00% Notes.
We have purchase obligations for goods and services where payments are based, in part, on the volume or type of services we require.
In those cases, we only included the minimum volume of purchase obligations in the table above.
Also, purchase orders for goods and services that are cancelable upon notice and without significant penalties are not included in the amounts above.
This amount does not include estimates of future purchase obligations to GF under the Wafer Supply Agreement, which we expect will continue to be material.
On August 14, 2007, we issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2012 (the 5.75% Notes).
The 5.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year beginning February 15, 2008 until the maturity date of August 15, 2012.
The terms of the 5.75% Notes are governed by an Indenture (the 5.75% Indenture), dated as of August 14, 2007, by and between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
As of December 31, 2011, the remaining outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 5.75% Notes was $485 million.
We may elect to refinance the outstanding amount of our 5.75% Notes, or to purchase or otherwise retire the outstanding amount of our 5.75% Notes in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries.
Otherwise, we will pay off the outstanding amount of our 5.75% Notes at maturity.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” below, for additional information regarding the 5.75% Notes.
On April 27, 2007, we issued $2.2 billion aggregate principal amount of 6.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2015.
The 6.00% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year beginning November 1, 2007 until the maturity date of May 1, 2015.
The terms of the 6.00% Notes are governed by an Indenture (the 6.00% Indenture) dated April 27, 2007, by and between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
In 2011, we repurchased $200 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes in open market transactions for $202 million.
As of December 31, 2011, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes was $580 million and the remaining carrying value was approximately $546 million, net of debt discount of $34 million.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire the balance of the 6.00% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” below, for additional information regarding the 6.00% Notes.
On November 30, 2009, we issued $500 million of the 8.125% Notes at a discount of 10.204%.
The 8.125% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on June 15 and December 15 of each year beginning June 15, 2010 until the maturity date of December 15, 2017.
The discount of $51 million is recorded as contra debt and is amortized to interest expense over the life of the 8.125% Notes using the effective interest method.
The 8.125% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 8.125% Indenture) dated November 30, 2009 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
From December 15, 2013, we may redeem the 8.125% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on December 15, 2013 through December 14, 2014                                      104.063% Beginning on December 15, 2014 through December 14, 2015                                      102.031% As of December 31, 2011, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 8.125% Notes was $500 million and the remaining carrying value was approximately $459 million, net of debt discount of $41 million.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire the 8.125% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or private negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer, when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding the 8.125% Notes.
On August 4, 2010, we issued $500 million of the 7.75% Notes.
The 7.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 1 and August 1 of each year beginning February 1, 2011 until the maturity date of August 1, 2020.
The 7.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 7.75% Indenture) dated August 4, 2010 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
From August 1, 2015, we may redeem the 7.75% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on August 1, 2015 through July 31, 2016 103.875% Beginning on August 1, 2016 through July 31, 2017 102.583% Beginning on August 1, 2017 through July 31, 2018 101.292% As of December 31, 2011, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Notes was $500 million.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire the 7.75% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or private negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer, when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” below, for additional information regarding the 7.75% Notes.
The agreements governing its 5.75% Notes, 6.00% Notes, 8.125% Notes and 7.75% Notes contain cross-default provisions whereby a default under one agreement would likely result in cross defaults under agreements covering other borrowings.
The occurrence of a default under any of these borrowing arrangements would permit the applicable note holders to declare all amounts outstanding under those borrowing arrangements to be immediately due and payable.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above include $5 million related to employee benefit obligations and $16 million of payments due under certain software and technology licenses that will be paid through 2014.
Other long-term liabilities excludes amounts recorded on our consolidated balance sheet that do not require us to make cash payments, which, as of December 31, 2011, primarily consisted of $17 million of deferred gains resulting from the sale and leaseback of certain of our facilities.
Also excluded from other long-term liabilities was $4 million of non-current unrecognized tax benefits, which are included in the caption “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2011.
This amount represents a potential cash payment that could be payable by us upon settlement with a taxing authority.
We have not included this amount in the contractual obligations table above because we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate regarding the timing of any settlement with the taxing authority, if any.
As of December 31, 2011, we had aggregate outstanding capital lease obligations of $26 million for one of our facilities in Canada, which is payable in monthly installments through 2017.
We lease certain of our facilities and in some jurisdictions, we lease the land on which these facilities are built, under non-cancelable lease agreements that expire at various dates through 2022.
We lease certain manufacturing and office equipment for terms ranging from 1 to 5 years.
Total future non-cancelable lease obligations as of December 31, 2011 were $175 million.
Our purchase obligations primarily include our obligations to purchase wafers and substrates from third parties.
Total non-cancelable purchase obligations, other than those to GF under the WSA, as of December 31, 2011 were $374 million.
We currently estimate that we will pay GF approximately $1.5 billion in 2012 for wafer purchases.
These 2012 estimated costs are based in part on our current expectations regarding GF’s manufacturing yields and wafer volumes, and the successful conclusion of our negotiations with GF and ATIC related to a second amendment to the WSA, including the pricing methodology.
Costs are also impacted by variations in yields and several other factors including our current expectations regarding demand for our products.
In addition, we estimate that additional purchase obligations in connection with research and development related to GF wafer production will be approximately $71 million in 2012.
We are not currently able to meaningfully quantify or estimate our purchase obligations to GF beyond 2012, but we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
In 2011, we received proceeds of approximately $170 million from the sale of accounts receivable under the receivable financing arrangement with the IBM Parties.
The IBM Parties collected approximately $396 million from our distributor customers participating in the financing arrangement.
We terminated our financing arrangement with the IBM Parties in February 2011 and did not make any adjustments to GAAP net cash provided by operating activities related to this financing arrangement in the third or fourth quarters of 2011 because there were no outstanding invoices, and we do not intend to do so in future periods.
In connection with the consummation of the GF manufacturing joint venture transaction on March 2, 2009, the terms of the 700 million euro Term Loan Facility Agreement among AMD Fab 36 Limited Liability Company & Co. KG, as borrower, and a consortium of banks led by Dresdner Bank AG, as lenders (the Fab 36 Term Loan), and other related agreements (collectively, the Fab 36 Loan Agreements) were amended to allow for the transfer of our former 300-millimeter wafer fabrication facility and its affiliated companies to GF.
In addition, we also amended the terms of the related guarantee agreement such that we and GF were joint guarantors of the borrower’s obligations to the lenders under the Fab 36 Loan Agreements.
On March 31, 2011, GF fully repaid the amounts outstanding under the Fab 36 Term Loan.
We were not required to make any payments under the related guarantee agreement.
The Advanced Mask Technology Center GmbH & Co. KG (AMTC) and Maskhouse Building Administration GmbH & Co. KG (BAC) are joint ventures initially formed for the purpose of constructing and operating an advanced photomask facility in Dresden, Germany.
In 2010, our limited partnership interests in AMTC and BAC were transferred to an affiliate of GF.
AMD, GF and Toppan Photomasks Germany GmbH guaranteed AMTC’s rental obligations relating to a portion of the BAC facility.
Our portion of the guarantee was made on a joint and several basis with GF.
GF separately agreed to indemnify us under certain circumstances if we were called upon to make any payments under the guarantee granted by us.
The BAC term loan was fully repaid in December 2011, and as a result the AMTC rental contract guarantee terminated.
We were not required to make any payments under the guarantee.
In addition, AMD and GF were joint and several guarantors of 50% of AMTC’s obligations under a revolving credit facility.
In December 2011, we were released from the guarantee.
We were not required to make any payments under the guarantee.
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and long-term debt.
We usually invest our cash in investments with short maturities or with frequent interest reset terms.
Accordingly, our interest income fluctuates with short-term market conditions.
As of December 31, 2011, our investment portfolio consisted primarily of time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, ARS, and corporate bonds.
With the exception of our ARS, these investments were highly liquid.
Due to the relatively short, weighted-average maturity of our investment portfolio and the current low interest rate environment, our exposure to interest rate risk is minimal.
As of December 31, 2011, all of our outstanding debt has fixed interest rates.
Consequently, our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates on reported interest expense and corresponding cash flows is minimal.
We will continue to monitor our exposure to interest rate risk.
We mitigate default risk in our investment portfolio by investing in only high credit quality securities and by constantly positioning our portfolio to respond appropriately to a significant reduction in a credit rating of any investment issuer or guarantor.
Our portfolio includes investments in debt and marketable equity securities with active secondary or resale markets to ensure portfolio liquidity.
We are averse to principal loss and strive to preserve our invested funds by limiting default risk and market risk.
We actively monitor market conditions and developments specific to the securities and security classes in which we invest.
We believe that we take a conservative approach to investing our funds in that we invest only in highly-rated debt securities with relatively short maturities and do not invest in securities we believe involve a higher degree of risk.
As of December 31, 2011, substantially all of our investments in debt securities were A rated by at least one of the rating agencies.
While we believe we take prudent measures to mitigate investment related risks, such risks cannot be fully eliminated as there are circumstances outside of our control.
We believe the current credit market difficulties do not have a material impact on our financial position.
However, a future degradation in credit market conditions could have a material adverse effect on our financial position.
As a result of the uncertainties in the credit markets, all of our ARS were negatively affected and auctions for these securities failed to settle on their respective settlement dates since February 2008.
As of December 31, 2011, we had approximately $38 million of investments in ARS.
See “Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in this report for further information.
The following table presents the cost basis, fair value and related weighted-average interest rates by year of maturity for our investment portfolio and debt obligations as of December 31, 2011: Fixed rate amounts $ 7 $ 133
ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements as ofDecember 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 and for each of the three years in the period ended December 26, 2015 and related notes, which are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Part I, Item 1: Business,” “Part II, Item 6: Selected Financial Data” and “Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We are a global semiconductor company primarily offering: x86 microprocessors, as a standalone central processing unit (CPU) or as incorporated into an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, and discrete graphics processing units (GPUs) for the consumer, commercial and professional graphics markets; and server and embedded CPUs, GPUs and APUs, and semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products and technology for game consoles.
In this MD&A, we will describe the results of operations and the financial condition for us and our consolidated subsidiaries, including a discussion of our results of operations for 2015 compared to 2014 and 2014 compared to 2013, an analysis of changes in our financial condition and a discussion of our contractual obligations and off balance sheet arrangements.
We faced a challenging business environment in 2015.
The impact of global macro-economic conditions, especially the volatility in the Greater China region contributed to a decrease in demand for our products.
Additionally, competitive pressures contributed to an overall challenging year.
We also experienced reduced demand from our Original Equipment Manufacturers (“OEM”) customers in advance of the launch of Microsoft Windows® 10.
Net revenue for 2015 was approximately $4.0 billion, a decrease of 28% compared to 2014 net revenue of $5.5 billion.
The decrease in net revenue from 2014 was due to a 42% decrease in Computing and Graphics segment revenue and an 8% decrease in Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment revenue.
Computing and Graphics segment revenue declined year- over-year primarily due to lower client processor sales.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment revenue declined year-over-year primarily due to lower server and embedded revenue and lower game console royalties, partially offset by higher semi-custom SoC sales.
Gross margin, as a percentage of net revenue for 2015, was 27% compared to 33% in 2014.
Gross margin in 2015 was adversely impacted by an inventory write-down of $65 million, which was primarily the result of lower anticipated demand for older-generation APUs and a technology node transition charge of $33 million.
The impact of the write-down accounted for approximately two gross margin percentage points and the technology node transition charge accounted for approximately one gross margin percentage point.
Gross margin in 2015 was also adversely impacted by a lower proportion of revenue from Computing and Graphics segment due to lower sales which has a higher average gross margin than our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and due to lower game console royalties.
Gross margin in 2014 included a $58 million lower of cost or market inventory adjustment, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point, and a $27 million benefit from technology licensing revenue, which accounted for less than one gross margin percentage point.
Operating loss for 2015 was $481 million compared to an operating loss of $155 million in 2014.
The decline in operating performance in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to a decrease in net revenue and in gross margin as described above.
Despite the challenging business environment, we made important changes to our business.
During 2015, we continued to focus on introducing a more diverse product portfolio.
As part of our long-term strategy to deliver great products, we introduced a number of new products in 2015 including, our 6th Generation AMD A- Series mobile processors (formerly codenamed “Carrizo”) in a SoC design and introduced a desktop A-series processor, the AMD A10-7870K APU.
We also introduced the A8-7670K APU designed to support Windows® 10, mainstream workloads and online gaming.
With respect to our graphics products, we introduced the new AMD Radeon™ R9 Fury X and R9 Fury graphics, the AMD Radeon R7 300 and R9 300 series graphics as well as the AMD Radeon M300 series graphics to reinforce our graphics leadership in both power efficiency for notebooks and best-in class performance for desktops.
We also expanded our AMD FirePro™ server GPU family by introducing the AMD FirePro S9170, designed for high performance compute (HPC) environments.
The AMD FirePro S9170 is based on second-generation AMD Graphics Core Next (GCN) GPU architecture and a unified scalable GPU optimized for graphics and compute.
We announced the AMD FirePro W4300 graphics card designed for Computer-Aided Design (CAD) for both small and full-size workstations.
We also launched the AMD Radeon R9 Nano, a small-form-factor mini-ITX enthusiast graphics card designed to deliver energy efficiency and performance for ultra-high resolutions, improved virtual reality experiences and smoother gameplay.
With respect to our embedded products, we introduced the AMD Embedded R-Series SOC processor designed for digital signage, retail signage, medical imaging, electronic gaming, media storage and communications and networking.
During 2015, we continued to focus on reducing our expenses.
Our operating expenses in 2015 decreased to $1.56 billion, from $1.99 billion in 2014.
Our operating expenses in 2014 included a goodwill impairment charge of $233 million.
We also took steps to simplify our business and better align resources around our priorities and business outlook.
In the third quarter of 2015, we implemented a restructuring plan (2015 Restructuring Plan).
The 2015 Restructuring Plan provides for a workforce reduction of approximately 5% and includes organizational actions such as outsourcing certain IT services and application development.
The 2015 Restructuring Plan also anticipates a charge for the consolidation of certain real estate facilities.
We realized operational savings, primarily in operating expenses, of approximately $8 million in 2015.
We expect the 2015 Restructuring Plan to result in operational savings, primarily in operating expenses, of approximately $48 million in 2016.
On October 15, 2015, we entered into an Equity Interest Purchase Agreement (the Equity Interest Purchase Agreement) with Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd., a Chinese joint stock company (JV Party), under which we will sell to JV Party a majority of the equity interests in AMD Technologies (China) Co. Ltd., a wholly-foreign owned enterprise incorporated as a limited liability company (the Chinese Target Company), and Advanced Micro Devices Export Sdn.
Bhd., a Malaysian limited liability company (the Malaysian Target Company and, together with the Chinese Target Company, the Target Companies), thereby forming two joint ventures (collectively, the JVs) with JV Party in a transaction valued at approximately $436 million (the Transaction).
The JV Party will acquire 85% of the equity interests in each JV for approximately $371 million and we estimate we will receive approximately $320 million cash, net of taxes and other customary expenses.
After closing, JV Party’s affiliates will own 85% of the equity interests in each JV while certain of our subsidiaries will own the remaining 15%.
The Transaction will result in the JVs providing assembly, testing, marking, packing and packaging services (ATMP) to us.
We plan to account for our investment in the JVs under the equity method of accounting.
Our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 26, 2015 were $785 million compared to $1.0 billion as of December 27, 2014.
Total debt as of December 26, 2015 was $2.26 billion, compared to $2.2 billion as of December 27, 2014.
On March 2, 2009, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement among us, Advanced Technology Investment Company LLC (currently known as Mubadala Technology Investments LLC (Mubadala Tech) and West Coast Hitech L.P. (WCH), pursuant to which we formed GF.
In connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement, AMD, Mubadala Tech and GF entered into a Wafer Supply Agreement (the WSA), a Funding Agreement (the Funding Agreement) and a Shareholders’ Agreement (the Shareholders’ Agreement) on March 2, 2009.
At GF’s formation on March 2, 2009 and through December 26, 2009, GF was deemed a variable-interest entity, and we were deemed to be GF’s primary beneficiary.
Accordingly, we consolidated GF under applicable accounting rules.
As a result of certain GF governance changes, we deconsolidated GF and accounted for our GF ownership under the equity method of accounting as of December 27, 2009.
Following the deconsolidation, GF became our related party.
In the first quarter of 2011, as a result of a contribution to GF by an affiliate of Mubadala Tech and certain GF governance changes noted above, our ownership in GF was diluted, and we concluded that we no longer had the ability to exercise significant influence over GF.
Accordingly, we changed our accounting for our investment in GF from the equity method to the cost method of accounting and recognized a dilution gain in investee of approximately $492 million.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we identified indicators of impairment in GF that were deemed other than temporary.
We performed a valuation analysis and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $209 million.
The carrying value of our remaining investment in GF after the impairment charge was $278 million as of December 31, 2011.
On March 4, 2012, as partial consideration for certain rights received under a second amendment to the WSA, we transferred to GF all of the remaining capital stock of GF that we owned.
In addition, as of March 4, 2012, the Funding Agreement was terminated, and we were no longer party to the Shareholders’ Agreement.
As a result of these transactions, we no longer owned any GF capital stock as of March 4, 2012.
GF continues to be a related party of us because Mubadala Development Company PJSC (Mubadala) and Mubadala Tech are affiliated with WCH, our largest stockholder.
WCH and Mubadala Tech are wholly-owned subsidiaries of Mubadala.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements, and a certain portion of our GPU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
If we acquire a third-party business that manufactures microprocessor and APU products, we will have up to two years to transition the manufacture of such microprocessor and APU products to GF.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor and APU products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
On December 6, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 made pursuant to the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products, to be delivered by GF to us from the fourth quarter of 2012 through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration for this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
As a result, we recorded a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million for the write-down of inventory to its market value in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee was paid over several quarters, with $80 million paid on December 28, 2012, $40 million paid on April 1, 2013 and $200 million paid on December 31, 2013.
On March 30, 2014, we entered into a fourth amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the fourth amendment was to establish volume purchase commitments and fixed pricing for the 2014 calendar year as well as to modify certain other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for some of our microprocessor, graphics processor and semi-custom game console products to be delivered by GF to us during the 2014 calendar year.
On April 16, 2015, we entered into a fifth amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the fifth amendment was to establish volume purchase commitments and fixed pricing for the 2015 calendar year as well as to modify certain other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for some of our microprocessor unit, graphics processor unit and semi-custom products to be delivered by GF to us during the 2015 calendar year.
As of December 26, 2015, certain wafer deliveries under the fifth amendment to the WSA have been delayed until fiscal 2016.
As ofDecember 26, 2015, purchase obligations for fiscal 2016 were approximately $248 million, of which approximately $185 million, consisting of wafers and research and development activities, were received by December 31, 2015.
We generally negotiate our purchase commitments with GF on an annual basis and as such we cannot meaningfully quantify or estimate our future purchase obligations to GF.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a sixth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
Our total purchases from GF related to wafer manufacturing and research and development activities were approximately$0.9 billion for 2015 and approximately On October 15, 2015, we entered into an Equity Interest Purchase Agreement (the Equity Interest Purchase Agreement) with Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd., a Chinese joint stock company (JV Party), under which we will sell to JV Party a majority of the equity interests in AMD Technologies (China) Co. Ltd., a wholly- foreign owned enterprise incorporated as a limited liability company (the Chinese Target Company), and Advanced Micro Devices Export Sdn.
Bhd., a Malaysian limited liability company (the Malaysian Target Company and, together with the Chinese Target Company, the Target Companies), thereby forming two joint ventures (collectively, the JVs) with JV Party in a transaction valued at approximately $436 million (the Transaction).
The JV Party will acquire 85% of the equity interests in each JV for approximately $371 million and we estimate we will receive approximately $320 million cash, net of taxes and other customary expenses.
After closing, JV Party’s affiliates will own 85% of the equity interests in each JV while certain of our subsidiaries will own the remaining 15%.
The Transaction will result in the JVs providing assembly, testing, marking, packing and packaging services (ATMP) to us.
We plan to account for our investment in the JVs under the equity method of accounting.
The Equity Interest Purchase Agreement also has related agreements including: (i) with respect to the Malaysian Target Company, a Shareholders’ Agreement, and with respect to the Chinese Target Company, a Joint Venture Contract governing the joint venture relationships from and after the Closing, (ii) an IP License Agreement, (iii) a Manufacturing Services Agreement, (iv) a Transition Services Agreement, and (v) a Trademark License Agreement.
The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2016, pending all regulatory and other approvals.
As a result of the decision to form the above JVs, the balance sheet as of December 26, 2015, reflects held-for-sale accounting of the ATMP assets and liabilities which requires reclassification of such financial amounts to current assets and current liabilities.
We reclassified $183 million to other current assets and $79 million to other current liabilities.
Asset balances reclassified into other current assets primarily consist of property, plant, and equipment of $110 million, goodwill of $42 million and inventory of $15 million.
Liability balances reclassified into other current liabilities primarily consist of accounts payable of $70 million.
The balances included in the final gain/(loss) calculation, at closing, are likely to be different due to normal operational activities occurring through the closing date.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP).
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to our revenue, inventories, goodwill impairments and income taxes.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Although actual results have historically been reasonably consistent with management’s expectations, the actual results may differ from these estimates or our estimates may be affected by different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
We record a provision for estimated sales returns and allowances on product sales for estimated future price reductions and other customer incentives in the same period that the related revenues are recorded.
We base these estimates on actual historical sales returns, historical allowances, historical price reductions, market activity and other known or anticipated trends and factors.
These estimates are subject to management’s judgment and actual provisions could be different from our estimates and current provisions, resulting in future adjustments to our revenue and operating results.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence based on projected sales outlook.
This evaluation includes analysis of historical sales levels by product and projections of future demand.
These projections assist us in determining the carrying value of our inventory.
In addition, we write off inventories that we consider obsolete.
We adjust the remaining specific inventory balances to approximate the lower of our standard manufacturing cost or market value.
Among other factors, management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining obsolescence and market value.
If, in any period, we anticipate future demand or market conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of sales in the period the revision is made.
This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period.
If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written down in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales, resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment present.
We perform an annual goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each year.
We evaluate whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level by first determining whether the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value and, if so, by determining whether the implied fair value of goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value.
The implied fair value of a reporting unit is determined through the application of one or more valuation models common to our industry, including the income, market and cost approaches.
While market valuation data for comparable companies is gathered and analyzed, we believe that there has not been sufficient comparability between the peer groups and the specific reporting units to allow for the derivation of reliable indications of value using a market approach.
Therefore, we have ultimately employed the income approach which requires estimates of present value of estimated future cash flows.
Cash flow projections are based on management’s estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market condition.
The key assumptions we have used to determine the fair value of our reporting units includes projected cash flows for the next 10 years and discount rates ranging from 13% to 35% from 2013 to 2015.
The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit’s ability to execute on the projected cash flows.
A variance in the discount rate could have a significant impact on the amount of the goodwill impairment charge recorded, if any.
Estimating the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions.
These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions and the determination of appropriate comparable publicly-traded companies.
In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to individual reporting units to determine the carrying amount of each reporting unit.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2015, each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value, ranging from approximately 17% to approximately 196%.
The Computing and Graphics reporting unit had the lowest excess of fair value over carrying value at 17%, however there is no goodwill within this reporting unit.
In estimating the fair value of our reporting units, we took into consideration the challenging industry and market trends that existed as of September 27, 2015, the date of the annual goodwill impairment test for each respective reporting unit.
Based on the results of our annual goodwill impairment analysis in 2014, we determined that the carrying value of the Computing and Graphics reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value and accordingly an impairment charge of $233 million was recorded, which represented the entire goodwill balance within this reporting unit.
The remaining two reporting units’ estimated fair values exceeded their carrying value, ranging from approximately 156% to approximately 209%.
In estimating the fair value of our reporting units, we took into consideration the challenging industry and market trends that existed as of September 28, 2014, the date of the annual goodwill impairment test for each respective reporting unit.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2013, each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value, indicating that there was no goodwill impairment.
Estimates of fair value for all or our reporting units can be affected by a variety of external and internal factors.
Potential events or circumstance that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the key assumptions we used in estimating the fair value of our reporting units include adverse changes in our industry, increased competition, an inability to successfully introduce new products in the marketplace or to achieve internal forecasts, and a decline in our stock price.
If the estimated fair value of our reporting units declines due to any of these factors, we may be required to record future goodwill impairment.
In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for tax and financial statement reporting purposes.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets.
If recovery is not likely, we must increase our charge to income tax expense, in the form of a valuation allowance, for the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
We consider past performance, future expected taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance.
In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the Internal Revenue Service or other taxing authority.
If our estimates of these taxes are greater or less than actual results, an additional tax benefit or charge will result.
We recognize the interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as interest expense and income tax expense, respectively.
Management, including the Chief Operating Decision Maker, who is our Chief Executive Officer, reviews and assesses our operating performance using segment net revenue and operating income (loss) before interest, other income (expense), net and income taxes.
These performance measures include the allocation of expenses to the operating segments based on management’s judgment.
In connection with our continued strategic transformation, effective July 1, 2014, we realigned our organizational structure.
As a result of this organizational change, we have the following two reportable segments: the Computing and Graphics segment, which primarily includes desktop and notebook processors and chipsets, discrete GPUs and professional graphics; and the Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment, which primarily includes server and embedded processors, semi-custom SoC products, engineering services and royalties.
In addition to these reportable segments, we have an All Other category, which is not a reportable segment.
This category primarily includes certain expenses and credits that are not allocated to any of the reportable segments because management does not consider these expenses and credits in evaluating the performance of the reportable segments.
Also included in this category are amortization of acquired intangible assets, employee stock-based compensation expense, restructuring and other special charges, net, technology node transition charge, workforce rebalancing severance charges, goodwill impairment charge, significant or unusual lower of cost or market inventory adjustments and a net gain from licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters.
We also reported the results of former businesses in the All Other category because the operating results were not material.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, the primary factors that resulted in those changes and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in December.
The years endedDecember 26, 2015, December 27, 2014 and December 28, 2013 each included 52 weeks.
References in this report to 2015, 2014 and 2013 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The following table provides a summary of net revenue and operating income (loss) by segment and income (loss) before income taxes for2015, 2014 and 2013.
The results prior to July 1, 2014 have been recast to reflect our new reportable segments.
Computing and Graphics net revenue of $1.8 billion in 2015 decreased by 42% compared to $3.1 billion in 2014 as a result of a 44% decrease in unit shipments, partially offset by a 3% increase in average selling price.
Unit shipments of all our Computing and Graphics products decreased.
The decrease in unit shipments of all categories of products was due to lower demand caused by challenging global macro economic conditions, especially in the Greater China region, in addition to increased competitive pressures and reduced demand from our OEM customers in advance of the Microsoft Windows® 10 operating system.
The increase in average selling price was primarily attributable to an increase in average selling price of our notebook GPU products and AIB products due to a favorable shift in our product mix, partially offset by a decrease in average selling price of our notebook microprocessor products and chipset products.
Computing and Graphics net revenue of $3.1 billion in 2014 decreased by 16% compared to $3.7 billion in 2013 as a result of a 27% decrease in unit shipments, partially offset by a 15% increase in average selling price.
The decrease in unit shipments was primarily attributable to lower unit shipments of our microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs and chipsets due to challenging consumer PC market conditions and our chipsets being integrated into our APU products.
The increase in average selling price was primarily attributable to an increase in average selling price of our microprocessor products due to improved product mix of our microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs.
Computing and Graphics operating loss was$502 million in 2015 compared to $76 million in 2014.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $696 million decrease in cost of sales, a $120 million decrease in research and development expenses and an $84 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments in 2015 compared to 2014, partially offset by an inventory write-down of $52 million as a result of lower anticipated demand for primarily older-generation APU products.
Operating loss in 2014 included a $19 million benefit from technology licensing revenue.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Computing and Graphics operating loss was $76 million in 2014 compared to an operating loss of $101 million in 2013.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to a $323 million decrease in cost of sales, a $201 million decrease in research and development expenses and an $89 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by the decrease in net revenue referenced above.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments in 2014 compared to 2013.
Operating loss in 2014 included a $19 million benefit from technology licensing revenue.
In addition, operating loss in 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of inventory that had been previously reserved in the third quarter of 2012, as compared to a similar $8 million benefit in 2014.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom net revenue of $2.2 billion in 2015 decreased by 8% compared to net revenue of $2.4 billion in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net revenue received in connection with lower unit shipments of our server and embedded products due primarily to increased competitive pressures, as well as due to the decrease in net revenue from certain royalty arrangements and a decrease in non-recurring engineering (NRE) revenue.
The decrease in net revenue was partially offset by an increase in net revenue received in connection with higher unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom net revenue of $2.4 billion in 2014 increased by 51% compared to net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2013.
The increase was primarily due to an increase in net revenue received in connection with higher unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products, which we began shipping in the second quarter of 2013.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom operating income was $215 million in 2015 compared to $399 million in 2014.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above and a $16 million increase in research and development expenses, partially offset by a $19 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses and a $2 million decrease in cost of sales.
The decrease in cost of sales was primarily due to a decrease in unit shipments of our server and embedded products in 2015 compared to 2014, largely offset by a technology node transition charge of $33 million and an inventory write- down of $13 million.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses decreased and research and development expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom operating income was $399 million in 2014 compared to $295 million in 2013.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $614 million increase in cost of sales, a $64 million increase in research and development expenses and a $15 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to an increase in unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products in 2014 compared to 2013.
In addition, operating income in 2014 included an $8 million benefit from technology license revenue.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
All Other revenue pertains to results from former businesses, which were immaterial in2015, 2014 and 2013.
All Other operating loss of $194 million in 2015 primarily included restructuring and other special charges, net of $129 million and stock-based compensation expense of $63 million.
Restructuring and other special charges, net of $129 million included $76 million related to our decision to exit from the dense server systems business, $37 million related to our 2015 Restructuring Plan and $16 million related to our 2014 Restructuring Plan.
All Other operating loss of $478 million in 2014 included a goodwill impairment charge of $233 million, stock-based compensation expense of $81 million, net restructuring and other special charges of $71 million, lower of cost or market inventory adjustment of $58 million, $14 million related to workforce rebalancing severance charges, $14 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and $7 million related to other expenses.
All Other operating loss of $91 million in 2013 included stock-based compensation expense of $91 million, net restructuring and other special charges of $30 million and $18 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets.
During the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlements regarding patent-related matters, for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash, which we recorded as an offset to operating expenses.
The following is a summary of certain consolidated statement of operations data for2015, 2014 and 2013.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was27% in 2015 compared to 33% in 2014.
Gross margin in 2015 was adversely impacted by an inventory write- down of $65 million, which was primarily the result of lower anticipated demand for older-generation APUs and a technology node transition charge of $33 million.
The impact of the write-down accounted for approximately two gross margin percentage points and the technology node transition charge accounted for approximately one gross margin percentage point.
Gross margin in 2015 was also adversely impacted by a lower proportion of revenue from Computing and Graphics segment due to lower sales which has a higher average gross margin than our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and also by lower game console royalties.
Gross margin in 2014 included a $58 million lower of cost or market inventory adjustment, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point, and a $27 million benefit from technology licensing revenue, which accounted for less than one gross margin percentage point.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 33% in 2014 compared to 37% in 2013.
Gross margin in 2014 included a $58 million lower of cost or market inventory adjustment, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point, and a $27 million benefit from technology licensing revenue, which accounted for less than one gross margin percentage point.
Gross margin in 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of inventory that was previously reserved in the third quarter of 2012, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point as compared to $8 million in 2014 which had a less than one percentage point impact.
Gross margin in 2014 was adversely impacted by lower average gross margins in our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment driven by increased sales of lower margin semi- custom SoC products.
Research and development expenses of $947 million in 2015 decreased by $125 million, or 12%, compared to $1.1 billion in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to a $120 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment and a $21 million decrease in the All Other category primarily related to a $9 million workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in 2014 and an $8 million decrease in stock-based compensation expenses.
The decrease was partially offset by a $16 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $116 million decrease in product engineering and design costs and a $4 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment increased primarily due to a $17 million increase in product engineering and design costs.
Research and development expenses of $1.1 billion in 2014 decreased by $129 million, or 11%, compared to $1.2 billion in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to a $201 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment, partially offset by a $64 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $9 million increase in the All Other category related to a workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in the first quarter of 2014.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $171 million decrease in product engineering and design costs, a $22 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expenses and a $10 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment, where we expect to continue to increase our investment, increased primarily due to a $59 million increase in product engineering and design costs and a $3 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $482 million in 2015 decreased by $122 million, or 20%, compared to $604 million in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to an $84 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment, a $19 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $19 million decrease in the All Other category primarily related to a $5 million workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in 2014 and a $10 million decrease in stock-based compensation expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $62 million decrease in sales and marketing expenses and a $22 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment decreased primarily due to a $5 million decrease in sales and marketing expenses and a $14 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $604 million in 2014 decreased by $70 million, or 10%, compared to $674 million in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to an $89 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment, partially offset by a $15 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $5 million increase in the All Other category related to a workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in the first quarter of 2014.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $61 million decrease in sales and marketing expenses and a $25 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment increased primarily due to an $8 million increase in sales and marketing expenses and a $5 million increase in other general and administrative expenses.
As of December 26, 2015, the Italian tax authorities had concluded their audit of our subsidiaries’ activities in Italy for the years 2003 through 2013.
We have agreed to a settlement of $11 million in taxes and penalties, which was reflected in full in the 2015 tax provision and $2 million in interest.
During the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash, which we recorded as an offset to operating expenses.
At the time we entered into the agreements, we did not have any future obligations that we were required to perform in order to earn the settlement payments.
Accordingly, we recognized the entire settlement amount in our operating results for the fourth quarter of 2013.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $3 million in 2015, $14 million in 2014 and $18 million in 2013.
The decrease from 2014 to 2015 was due to the impairment of intangible assets as a result of our exit from the dense server systems business in the first quarter of 2015.
The decrease from 2013 to 2014 was due to the reduced amortization base amount of acquired intangible assets of ATI.
In the third quarter of 2015, we implemented a restructuring plan (2015 Restructuring Plan) focused on our ongoing efforts to simplify our business and better align resources around our priorities and business outlook.
The 2015 Restructuring Plan involves a reduction of global headcount by approximately 5% and includes organizational actions such as outsourcing certain IT services and application development.
During 2015, we recorded a $37 million restructuring charge, which consisted of approximately $27 million of severance and benefit costs, approximately $1 million of facilities related consolidation charges and approximately $9 million of intangible asset related charges associated with the impairment of certain software licenses that have ongoing payment obligations.
The 2015 Restructuring Plan resulted in total cash payments of $14 million in 2015.
We expect the 2015 Restructuring Plan will likely result in total cash payments of approximately $14 million in 2016.
We expect actions associated with the 2015 Restructuring Plan to be substantially completed by the end of the third quarter of 2016.
The following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities during 2015 and the related liabilities recorded in “Other current liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 26, 2015: In the fourth quarter of 2014, we implemented a restructuring plan (2014 Restructuring Plan) designed to improve operating efficiencies.
The 2014 Restructuring Plan involved a reduction of global headcount by approximately 6% and an alignment of our real estate footprint with our reduced headcount.
We recorded a$57 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter of 2014, which consisted of$44 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, $6 million for contract or program termination costs, $1 million for facilities related costs and $6 million for asset impairments, a non-cash charge.
During 2015, we recorded a $16 million restructuring charge, which consisted of $5 million non-cash charge related to asset impairments, $2 million for severance and related benefits and $9 million for facilities related costs.
The 2014 Restructuring Plan was substantially completed by the end of the third quarter of 2015.
The following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities during 2015 and the related liabilities recorded in “Other current liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 26, 2015: In the fourth quarter of 2012, we implemented a restructuring plan designed to improve our cost structure and to strengthen our competitiveness in core growth areas.
The plan primarily involved a workforce reduction of approximately 14% as well as asset impairments and facility consolidations.
We recorded restructuring expense in the fourth quarter of 2012 of approximately $90 million, which was primarily comprised of employee severance.
The non-cash portion of the restructuring expense included approximately $4 million of asset impairments.
In 2014 and 2013, we incurred costs of $3 million and $11 million, respectively, related to facility consolidation and site closures, which were partially offset by the release of employee-related severance costs of $2 million and $5 million, respectively.
The 2012 restructuring plan was substantially completed as of the end of the third quarter of 2013.
As a part of our strategy to simplify and sharpen our investment focus, we exited the dense server systems business, formerly SeaMicro, in the first quarter of 2015.
As a result, we recorded a charge of $76 million in “Restructuring and other special charges, net” on our consolidated statements of operations during 2015.
This charge consisted of an impairment charge of $62 million related to the acquired intangible assets.
We concluded that the carrying value of the acquired intangible assets associated with our dense server systems business was fully impaired as we did not have plans to utilize the related freedom fabric technology in any of our future products nor did we have any plans at that time to monetize the associated intellectual property.
In addition, the exit charge consisted of a $7 million non-cash charge related to asset impairments, $4 million of severance and related benefits and $3 million for contract or program termination costs.
We expect to complete this exit activity by the end of the first quarter of 2016.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, we recorded other special charges of $13 million.
The amount primarily included $10 million due to the departure of our former CEO, of which $5 million was related to cash and $5 million was related to stock-based compensation expense.
The amount is recorded under “Restructuring and other special charges, net” on the consolidated statements of operations.
In September 2013, we sold a light industrial building in Singapore and leased back a portion of the original space.
We received net cash proceeds of $46 million in connection with the sale, which resulted in a $17 million gain that we recorded in the third quarter of 2013 and a deferred gain of $14 million as of September 28, 2013 that is being amortized over the initial operating lease term.
The initial operating lease term expires in September 2023 and provides for options to extend the operating lease for 4 years at the end of the initial lease term, and for an additional 3.5 years thereafter.
In September 2013, we also sold an office building in Austin, Texas.
We received net cash proceeds of $10 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $5 million gain in the third quarter of 2013.
In March 2013, we sold and leased back certain land and office buildings in Austin, Texas.
We received net cash proceeds of $164 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $52 million charge in the first quarter of 2013.
The operating lease expires in March 2025 and provides for one 10-year optional renewal.
In March 2013, we also sold an office building in Markham, Ontario, Canada and leased back a portion of the original space through June 2013.
We received net cash proceeds of $13 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $6 million gain in the first quarter of 2013.
The net charge of $24 million recognized in 2013 related to the real estate transactions described above is recorded in the “Restructuring and other special charges, net” line item on the consolidated statements of operations.
Interest expense of $160 million in 2015 decreased by $17 million compared to $177 million in 2014, primarily due to timing of issuances of new debt and repurchases of other debt in 2014.
Interest expense of $177 million in 2014 was flat compared to$177 million in 2013.
Other expense, net, in 2015 was $5 million compared to $66 million of other expense, net, in 2014 and $0 million of other expense, net, in 2013.
In 2015, we recognized $5 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
In 2014, we recognized $66 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a $61 million loss from debt repurchases and a $7 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, partially offset by $3 million interest income.
In 2013, we recognized $0 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a $2 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and a $2 million realized loss on sale of our auction rate securities (ARS) investments, offset by $5 million interest income.
We recorded an income tax provision of$14 million, $5 million and $9 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
The income tax provision in 2015 was primarily due to $16 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations, offset by $2 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
The income tax provision in 2014 was primarily due to $7 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations, offset by $2 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
The income tax provision in 2013 was primarily due to $9 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations and $3 million related to the reversal of previously recognized tax benefits associated with other comprehensive income, offset by $3 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
As of December 26, 2015, substantially all of our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, continued to be subject to a valuation allowance.
The realization of these assets is dependent on substantial future taxable income which, at December 26, 2015, in management’s estimate, is not more likely than not to be achieved.
As of December 26, 2015, the Italian tax authorities had concluded their audit of our subsidiaries’ activities in Italy for the years 2003 through 2013.
We have agreed to a settlement of $11 million in taxes and penalties, which was reflected in full in the 2015 tax provision, and $2 million in interest.
We allocated stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units for the years endedDecember 26, 2015, December 27, 2014 and December 28, 2013 in our consolidated statements of operations as follows: Total stock-based compensation expense, net of tax of $0 During 2015, 2014 and 2013, we did not realize any excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation and therefore we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows.
Stock-based compensation expense of $63 million in 2015 decreased by $18 million as compared to $81 million in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to a lower weighted average grant date fair value and the effect of the 2015 and 2014 Restructuring Plans.
Stock-based compensation expense of $81 million in 2014 decreased by $10 million as compared to $91 million in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to lower expense related to stock options and restricted stock granted in connection with our SeaMicro acquisition as most awards became fully vested during 2014 and lower stock compensation expense as a result of our 2014 Restructuring Plan.
As of December 26, 2015, we had $11 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to stock options that will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.30 years.
Also, as of December 26, 2015, we had $88 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to restricted stock and restricted stock units including performance-based restricted stock units that will be recognized over a weighted- average period of 1.99 years.
The decrease in international sales as a percentage of net revenue in 2015 compared 2014 was primarily driven by a decrease in sales in China.
The decrease in international sales as a percentage of net revenue in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily driven by an increase in net revenue from domestic sales of our semi-custom SoC products.
We expect that international sales will continue to be a significant portion of total sales in the foreseeable future.
Substantially all of our sales transactions were denominated in U.S. dollars.
Our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities consisted of money market funds and commercial paper.
As ofDecember 26, 2015, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $785 million were lower compared to $1.0 billion as of December 27, 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to lower sales and the timing of related collections and the timing of accounts payable payments made.
During 2015, we used $96 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment.
The percentage of cash and cash equivalents held domestically was 88% as of December 26, 2015 and 89% as of December 27, 2014.
Our debt and capital lease obligations as of December 26, 2015 were $2.3 billion as compared to $2.2 billion as of December 27, 2014.
During 2015, we received $100 million net proceeds from our Secured Revolving Line of Credit, of which $42 million was used to repay the remaining aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents balance along with the savings from our restructuring plans and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit will be sufficient to fund operations, including capital expenditures, over the next 12 months.
We believe that in the event we decide to obtain external funding, we may be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives.
Over the longer term, should additional funding be required, such as to meet payment obligations of our long-term debt when due, we may need to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities, which may be issued from time to time under an effective registration statement, through the issuance of securities in a transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
Uncertain global economic conditions have in the past adversely impacted, and may in the future adversely impact, our business.
If market conditions deteriorate, we may be limited in our ability to access the capital markets to meet liquidity needs on favorable terms or at all, which could adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition, including our ability to refinance maturing liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $226 million in 2015 compared to $98 million in 2014.
The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to lower cash collections during 2015 compared 2014 driven by lower sales compared to2014, partially offset by lower other operating expenses and labor cost as a result of restructuring actions and the absence of the final $200 million cash payment made in the first quarter of 2014 related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments.
Net cash used in operating activities was $98 million in 2014 compared to $148 million in 2013.
The decrease in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to higher cash collections during 2014 compared 2013 driven by slightly higher sales compared to2013, partially offset by the $113 million prepayments to GF in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $147 million in 2015, which consisted of a net cash inflow of $235 million from purchases, sales and maturities of available for sale securities, partially offset by a net cash outflow of $88 million for purchases and sales of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $12 million in 2014, which consisted of a cash outflow of $95 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment, offset by a net cash inflow of $83 million from purchases, sales and maturities of available for sale securities.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $455 million in 2013 and primarily consisted of net proceeds of $301 million from the purchase, sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities and net proceeds of $154 million from sales and purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59 million in 2015, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $100 million, of which $42 million was used to repay the remaining aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes during the second quarter of 2015.
In addition, during 2015, we received $5 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $46 million in 2014, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our 6.75% Notes of $589 million, our 7.00% Notes of $491 million and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $75 million, partially offset by $518 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 6.00% Notes, $522 million in payments to repurchase our 8.125% Notes, $48 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 7.75% Notes, $24 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 7.50% Notes and $3 million in payments for capital lease obligations.
During 2014, we also received $4 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $13 million in 2013, primarily due to net proceeds of $55 million from borrowings pursuant to our Secured Revolving Line of Credit, $3 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan and $10 million from other financing activities, including net proceeds from U.S. government grants for research and development activities and foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products.
The cash inflows were partially offset by the repurchase of $50 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes (which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes) in open market transactions and $5 million in payments for capital lease obligations.
During 2015, 2014 and 2013, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows for these periods.
The following table summarizes our consolidated principal contractual cash obligations, as ofDecember 26, 2015, and is supplemented by the discussion following the table: (1) Represents estimated aggregate interest obligations for our outstanding debt obligations that are payable in cash, excluding non-cash amortization of debt issuance costs.
(2) We have purchase obligations for goods and services where payments are based, in part, on the volume or type of services we acquire.
In those cases, we only included the minimum volume of purchase obligations in the table above.
Purchase orders for goods and services that are cancelable upon notice and without significant penalties are not included in the amounts above.
In addition, we have included in the table above obligations for software technology and licenses where payments are fixed and non-cancelable.
(3) Includes our purchase obligations to GF for wafer manufacturing and research and development activities and reflects the impact of wafer receipts under the fifth amendment to the WSA delayed into fiscal 2016.
As of December 26, 2015, purchase obligations for fiscal 2016 were approximately $248 million, of which approximately $185 million, consisting of wafers and research and development activities, were received by December 31, 2015.
We generally negotiate our purchase commitments with GF on an annual basis and as such we cannot meaningfully quantify or estimate our future purchase obligations to GF.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a sixth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
(4) Total amount excludes contractual obligations already recorded on our consolidated balance sheets except for debt obligations and other long-term liabilities.
On April 27, 2007, we issued $2.2 billion aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
In 2015, we paid off the remaining$42 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes in cash.
As of December 26, 2015, we did not have any 6.00% Notes outstanding.
On February 26, 2014, we issued $600 million of our 6.75% Notes.
Our 6.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on March 1 and September 1 of each year beginning September 1, 2014 until the maturity date of March 1, 2019.
Our 6.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 6.75% Indenture) dated February 26, 2014 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
At any time before March 1, 2019, we may redeem some or all of our 6.75% Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a “make whole” premium (as set forth in the 6.75% Indenture).
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 6.75% Notes.
On August 4, 2010, we issued $500 million of our 7.75% Notes.
Our 7.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 1 and August 1 of each year beginning February 1, 2011 until the maturity date of August 1, 2020.
Our 7.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated August 4, 2010 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
From August 1, 2015, we may redeem our 7.75% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on August 1, 2015 through July 31, 2016 Beginning on August 1, 2016 through July 31, 2017 Beginning on August 1, 2017 through July 31, 2018 See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.75% Notes.
On August 15, 2012, we issued $500 million of our 7.50% Notes.
Our 7.50% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year beginning February 15, 2013 until the maturity date of August 15, 2022.
The 7.50% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated August 15, 2012 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
Prior to August 15, 2022, we may redeem some or all of our 7.50% Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a “make whole” premium (as set forth in the 7.50% Indenture).
As of December 26, 2015, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Notes was$475 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.50% Notes.
On June 16, 2014, we issued $500 million of 7.00% Notes.
The 7.00% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year beginning January 1, 2015 until the maturity date of July 1, 2024.
The 7.00% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 7.00% Indenture) dated June 16, 2014 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
At any time before July 1, 2017, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the 7.00% Notes within 90 days of the closing of an equity offering with the net proceeds thereof at a redemption price equal to 107.000% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date of redemption.
Prior to July 1, 2019, we may redeem some or all of the 7.00% Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a “make whole” premium (as set forth in the 7.00% Indenture).
Starting July 1, 2019, we may redeem our 7.00% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020                                                                                                                                                                            103.500% Beginning on July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021                                                                                                                                                                            102.333% Beginning on July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022                                                                                                                                                                            101.167% See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.00% Notes.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire our 6.75% Notes, 7.75% Notes, 7.50% Notes and 7.00% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
We and our subsidiary, AMD International Sales & Service, Ltd. (together, the Borrowers), entered into a loan and security agreement on November 12, 2013, as amended on December 11, 2014 (the Loan Agreement) for our Secured Revolving Line of Credit for a principal amount of up to $500 million, with up to $75 million available for issuance of letters of credit, with a group of lenders and Bank of America, N.A., acting as agent for the lenders (the Agent).
Our Secured Revolving Line of Credit had a maturity date of November 12, 2018.
Borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit were limited to up to 85% of eligible account receivable minus certain reserves and may be used for general corporate purposes, including working capital needs.
On April 14, 2015, the Borrowers and ATI Technologies ULC (together with the Borrowers, the Loan Parties), amended and restated the Loan Agreement (the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement) by and among the Loan Parties, the financial institutions party thereto from time to time as lenders (the Lenders) and the Agent.
The Amended and Restated Loan Agreement provides for a Secured Revolving Line of Credit for a principal amount of up to $500 million with up to $75 million available for issuance of letters of credit, which remained unchanged from the Loan Agreement.
Borrowings under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit are limited to up to 85% of eligible accounts receivable (90% for certain qualified eligible accounts receivable), minus specified reserves.
The size of the commitments under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit may be increased by up to an aggregate amount of $200 million.
The Secured Revolving Line of Credit matures on April 14, 2020 and is secured by a first priority security interest in the Loan Parties’ accounts receivable, inventory, deposit accounts maintained with the Agent and other specified assets, including books and records.
The Borrowers may elect a per annum interest rate equal to (a) the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus the applicable margin set forth in the applicable chart below (the “Applicable Margin”) as determined by the average availability under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit and the fixed charge coverage ratio for the most recently ended four-fiscal quarter period; or (b) (i) the greatest of (x) the Agent’s prime rate, (y) the federal funds rate, as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York plus 0.50%, and (z) LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1.00%, plus (ii) the Applicable Margin.
Applicable Margin, if average availability is equal to or greater than 66.66% of the total commitment amount and the fixed charge coverage ratio for the most recently ended four-fiscal quarter period is greater than or equal to 1.25 to 1.00, is 0.25% for Base Rate Revolver Loans and 1.25% for LIBOR Revolver Loans.
Otherwise, Applicable Margin is determined in accordance with the below table: The Secured Revolving Line of Credit may be optionally prepaid or terminated, and unutilized commitments may be reduced at any time, in each case without premium or penalty.
In connection with the Secured Revolving Line of Credit, the Borrowers will pay an unused line fee equal to 0.375% per annum, payable monthly on the unused amount of the commitments under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
The unused line fee decreases to 0.25% per annum when 35% or more of the Secured Revolving Line of Credit is utilized.
The Borrowers will pay (i) a monthly fee on all letters of credit outstanding under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit equal to the applicable LIBOR margin and (ii) a fronting fee to the Agent equal to 0.125% of all such letters of The Amended and Restated Loan Agreement contains covenants that place certain restrictions on the Loan Parties’ ability to, among other things, allow certain of the Company’s subsidiaries that manufacture or process inventory for the Loan Parties to borrow secured debt or unsecured debt beyond a certain amount, amend or modify certain terms of any debt of $50 million or more or subordinated debt, create or suffer to exist any liens upon accounts or inventory, sell or transfer any of Loan Parties’ accounts or inventory other than certain ordinary-course transfers and certain supply chain finance arrangements, make certain changes to any Loan Party’s name or form or state of organization without notifying the Agent, liquidate, dissolve, merge, amalgamate, combine or consolidate, or become a party to certain agreements restricting the Loan Parties’ ability to incur or repay debt, grant liens, make distributions, or modify loan agreements.
Further restrictions apply when certain payment conditions (the Payment Conditions) are not satisfied with respect to specified transactions, events or payments.
The Payment Conditions include that (i) no default or event of default exists and (ii) at all times during the 45 consecutive days immediately prior to such transaction, event or payment and on a pro forma basis after giving effect to such transaction, event or payment and any incurrence or repayment of indebtedness in connection therewith, the Loan Parties’ Excess Cash Availability (as defined in the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement) is greater than the greater of 20% of the total commitment amount and $100 million.
Such restrictions limit the Loan Parties’ ability to, among other things, create any liens upon any of the Loan Parties’ property other than customary permitted liens and liens on up to $1.5 billion of secured credit facilities debt (which amount includes the Secured Revolving Line of Credit), declare or make cash distributions, create any encumbrance on the ability of a subsidiary to make any upstream payments, make asset dispositions other than certain ordinary course dispositions and certain supply chain finance arrangements, make certain loans, make payments with respect to subordinated debt or certain borrowed money prior to its due date or become a party to certain agreements restricting the Loan Parties’ ability to enter into any non arm’s-length transaction with an affiliate.
The Loan Parties are required to repurchase, redeem, defease, repay, create a segregated account for the repayment of, or request Agent to reserve a sufficient available amount under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit for the repayment of, all debt for borrowed money exceeding $50 million, by no later than 60 days prior to its maturity date (not including the Secured Revolving Line of Credit).
Any reserved funds for this purpose would not be included in domestic cash calculations.
In addition, if at any time the Loan Parties’ Excess Cash Availability is less than the greater of 15% of the total commitment amount and $75 million, the Loan Parties must maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.00 to 1.00 until (i) no event of default exists and (ii) the Loan Parties’ Excess Cash Availability is greater than the greater of 15% of the total commitment amount and $75 million for 45 consecutive days.
The events of default under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement include, among other things, payment defaults, the inaccuracy of representations or warranties, defaults in the performance of affirmative and negative covenants, bankruptcy and insolvency related defaults, a cross-default related to indebtedness in an aggregate amount in excess of $50 million, judgments entered against a Loan Party in an amount that exceeds cumulatively $50 million, certain ERISA events and events related to Canadian defined benefits plans and a change of control.
When a Payment Condition has not been satisfied, additional events of default include, among other things, a loss, theft damage or destruction with respect to any collateral if the amount not covered by insurance exceeds $50 million.
On June 10, 2015, the Loan Parties entered into a First Amendment to the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the “First Amendment”) by and among the Loan Parties, the Lenders and the Agent, which modifies the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement.
Amendments to the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement effected by the First Amendment include the addition of exceptions to the liens and asset sale covenants to permit the Loan Parties to enter into certain supply chain finance arrangements, as well as the addition of certain definitions related thereto.
A t December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014, the Secured Revolving Line of Credit had an outstanding loan balance of$230 million and $130 million, respectively, at an interest rate of 4.00% and 4.25%, respectively.
At December 26, 2015, the Secured Revolving Line of Credit also had$16 million related to outstanding Letters of Credit, and up to $87 million available for future borrowings.
We report our intra-period changes in our revolving credit balance on a net basis in our consolidated statement of cash flows as we intend the period of the borrowings to be brief, repaying borrowed amounts within 90 days.
As of December 26, 2015, we were in compliance with all required covenants stated in the Loan Agreement.
The agreements governing the 6.75% Notes, 7.75% Notes, 7.50% Notes, 7.00% Notes and the Secured Revolving Line of Credit contain cross-default provisions whereby a default under one agreement would likely result in cross defaults under agreements covering other borrowings.
The occurrence of a default under any of these borrowing arrangements would permit the applicable note holders or the lenders under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit to declare all amounts outstanding under those borrowing arrangements to be immediately due and payable.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above primarily consisted of $40 million of payments due under certain software and technology licenses that will be paid through 2018.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above exclude amounts recorded on our consolidated balance sheet that do not require us to make cash payments, which, as of December 26, 2015, primarily consisted of $18 million of deferred gains resulting from certain real estate transactions that occurred in Sunnyvale, California in 1998, in Markham, Ontario, Canada in 2015 and 2008 and in Singapore in 2013.
Accruals related to facility consolidation and site closure costs under our restructuring plans of $7 million, deferred rent related to our facilities in Sunnyvale, California of $6 million and operating lease accruals of $5 million are excluded from other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above as they are included in the operating leases obligations.
Also excluded from other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above are $4 million of environmental reserves and $4 million of non-current unrecognized tax benefits, which represent potential cash payments that could be payable by us upon settlements with the related authorities.
We have not included these amounts in the contractual obligations table above because we cannot make reasonably reliable estimates regarding the timing of the settlements with the related authorities, if any.
We terminated our capital lease obligations and entered into a non-cancelable operating lease agreement related to one of our facilities in Markham, Ontario, Canada during 2015.
As of December 26, 2015, we did not have any capital lease obligations outstanding.
We lease certain of our facilities, and in some jurisdictions, we lease the land on which these facilities are built under non-cancelable lease agreements that expire at various dates through 2028.
We lease certain manufacturing and office equipment for terms ranging from one to five years.
Total future non-cancelable lease obligations as of December 26, 2015 were $306 million, including approximately $251 million of future lease payments and estimated operating costs related to real estate transactions that occurred in Austin, Texas, Sunnyvale, California, Markham, Canada and Singapore.
Our purchase obligations primarily include our obligations to purchase wafers and substrates from third parties, excluding our wafer purchase commitments to GF under the WSA.
As of December 26, 2015, total non-cancelable purchase obligations were $319 million.
Obligations to GF represent all of our expected cash payments to GF based on wafer receipts and research and development activities.
As ofDecember 26, 2015, purchase obligations for fiscal 2016 were approximately $248 million, of which amount wafers and research and development activities of approximately $185 million were received by December 31, 2015.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a sixth amendment to the WSA and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
As of December 26, 2015, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and long-term debt.
We usually invest our cash in investments with short maturities or with frequent interest reset terms.
Accordingly, our interest income fluctuates with short-term market conditions.
As of December 26, 2015, our investment portfolio consisted primarily of commercial paper.
These investments were highly liquid.
Due to the relatively short, weighted- average maturity of our investment portfolio and the current low interest rate environment, our exposure to interest rate risk is minimal.
As of December 26, 2015, the majority of our outstanding debt had fixed interest rates.
Consequently, our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates on reported interest expense and corresponding cash flows is minimal.
We will continue to monitor our exposure to interest rate risk.
We mitigate default risk in our investment portfolio by investing in only high credit quality securities and by constantly positioning our portfolio to respond to a significant reduction in a credit rating of any investment issuer or guarantor.
Our portfolio includes investments in debt and marketable equity securities with active secondary or resale markets to ensure portfolio liquidity.
We are averse to principal loss and strive to preserve our invested funds by limiting default risk and market risk.
We actively monitor market conditions and developments specific to the securities and security classes in which we invest.
We believe that we take a conservative approach to investing our funds in that we invest only in highly-rated debt securities with relatively short maturities and do not invest in securities we believe involve a higher degree of risk.
As of December 26, 2015, substantially all of our investments in debt securities were A rated by at least one of the rating agencies.
While we believe we take prudent measures to mitigate investment related risks, such risks cannot be fully eliminated as there are circumstances outside of our control.
There were no sales of available-for-sale securities during 2015.
The following table presents the cost basis, fair value and related weighted-average interest rates by year of maturity for our investment portfolio and debt obligations as of December 26, 2015: Foreign Exchange Risk.
As a result of our foreign operations, we incur costs and we carry assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies, while sales of products are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars.
We maintain a foreign currency hedging strategy, which uses derivative financial instruments to mitigate the risks associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
This strategy takes into consideration all of our exposures.
We do not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
In applying our strategy, from time to time, we use foreign currency forward contracts to hedge certain forecasted expenses denominated in foreign currencies.
We designate these contracts as cash flow hedges of forecasted expenses, to the extent eligible under the accounting rules, and evaluate hedge effectiveness prospectively and retrospectively.
As such, the effective portion of the gain or loss on these contracts is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and reclassified to earnings in the same line item as the associated forecasted transaction and in the same period during which the hedged transaction affects earnings.
Any ineffective portion is immediately recorded in earnings.
net loss for 2013 improved to $83 million compared to a net loss of $1.2 billion for 2012.
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, including long-term marketable securities, as of December 28, 2013 were $1.2 billion, the same as of December 29, 2012.
The financial results for the second half of 2013 were evidence of our transformation efforts, as we derived more than 30% of net revenues from semi-custom and embedded products.
During the second half of 2013, we also began laying the foundation for execution of the third phase of our transformation plan, in which we intend to expand our business beyond a transitioning traditional PC industry by creating a more diverse product portfolio and expanding our revenue base into new high-growth adjacent markets.
We seek to transform our business to attain approximately 50% of revenue from high-growth adjacent markets by the end of 2015.
On March 2, 2009, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement among us, Advanced Technology Investment Company LLC (ATIC) and West Coast Hitech L.P. (WCH), pursuant to which we formed GF.
In connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement, AMD, ATIC and GF entered into a Wafer Supply Agreement (the WSA), a Funding Agreement (the Funding Agreement) and a Shareholders’ Agreement (the Shareholders’ Agreement) on March 2, 2009.
At GF’s formation on March 2, 2009 and through December 26, 2009, GF was deemed a variable-interest entity and we were deemed to be GF’s primary beneficiary.
Accordingly, we consolidated GF under applicable accounting rules.
As a result of certain GF governance changes, we deconsolidated GF and accounted for our GF ownership under the equity method of accounting as of December 27, 2009.
Following the deconsolidation, GF became our related party.
In the first quarter of 2011, as a result of a contribution to GF by an affiliate of ATIC and certain GF governance changes noted above, our ownership in GF was diluted and we concluded that we no longer had the ability to exercise significant influence over GF.
Accordingly, we changed our accounting for our investment in GF from the equity method to the cost method of accounting and recognized a dilution gain in investee of approximately $492 million.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we identified indicators of impairment in GF that were deemed other than temporary.
We performed a valuation analysis and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $209 million.
The carrying value of our remaining investment in GF after the impairment charge was $278 million as of December 31, 2011.
On March 4, 2012, as partial consideration for certain rights received under a second amendment to the WSA, we transferred to GF all of the remaining capital stock of GF that we owned.
In addition, as of March 4, 2012, the Funding Agreement was terminated and we were no longer party to the Shareholders’ Agreement.
As a result of these transactions, we no longer owned any GF capital stock as of March 4, 2012.
GF continues to be a related party of us because Mubadala Development Company PJSC’s (Mubadala) and ATIC are affiliated with WCH, our largest stockholder.
WCH and ATIC are wholly-owned subsidiaries of Mubadala.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
If we acquire a third-party business that manufactures microprocessor and APU products, we will have up to two years to transition the manufacture of such microprocessor and APU products to GF.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor and APU products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
On April 2, 2011, we entered into a first amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the first amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors and APU products.
The first amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
On March 4, 2012, we entered into a second amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the second amendment was to modify certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products, to be delivered by GF to us during 2012.
Under the terms of the second amendment to the WSA, GF granted us rights to contract with another wafer foundry supplier with respect to specified 28nm products for a specified period of time (the limited waiver of exclusivity).
In consideration for the limited waiver of exclusivity, we recorded a charge of $703 million in the first quarter of 2012, consisting of a $425 million cash payment and a $278 million non-cash charge representing the transfer to GF of our remaining investment in GF at fair value.
On December 6, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 made pursuant to the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products, to be delivered by GF to us from the fourth quarter of 2012 through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration for this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
As a result, we recorded a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million for the write-down of inventory to its market value in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee was paid over several quarters, with $80 million paid on December 28, 2012, $40 million paid on April 1, 2013 and $200 million paid on December 31, 2013.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fourth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
Our expenses related to GF’s wafer manufacturing were $962 million, $1.2 billion and $904 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Our expenses related to GF’s research and development activities were $16 million, $49 million and $79 million for 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to our revenue, inventories, goodwill impairments and income taxes.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Although actual results have historically been reasonably consistent with management’s expectations, the actual results may differ from these estimates or our estimates may be affected by different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
We record a provision for estimated sales returns and allowances on product sales for estimated future price reductions and other customer incentives in the same period that the related revenues are recorded.
We base these estimates on actual historical sales returns, allowances, historical price reductions, market activity and other known or anticipated trends and factors.
These estimates are subject to management’s judgment and actual provisions could be different from our estimates and current provisions, resulting in future adjustments to our revenues and operating results.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence.
This evaluation includes analysis of sales levels by product and projections of future demand.
These projections assist us in determining the carrying value of our inventory.
In addition, we write off inventories that are considered obsolete.
We adjust the remaining specific inventory balances to approximate the lower of our standard manufacturing cost or market value.
Among other factors, management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining obsolescence and market value.
If, in any period, we anticipate future demand or market conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of sales in the period the revision is made.
This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period.
If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written off in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales, resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment present.
We perform an annual goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each year.
We evaluate whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level by first determining whether the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value and, if so, by determining whether the implied fair value of goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value.
The implied fair value of a reporting unit is determined through the application of one or more valuation models common to our industry, including the income, market and cost approaches.
While market valuation data for comparable companies is gathered and analyzed, we believe that there has not been sufficient comparability between the peer groups and the specific reporting units to allow for the derivation of reliable indications of value using a market approach.
Therefore, we have ultimately employed the income approach which requires estimates of future operating results and cash flows of each of the reporting units, discounted using estimated discount rates.
The key assumptions we have used to determine the fair value of our reporting units includes projected cash flows for the next 10 years and discount rates ranging from 13% in 2011 to 30% in 2013.
Discount rates are based on our weighted-average cost of capital, adjusted for the risks associated with operations.
A variance in the discount rate could have a significant impact on the amount of the goodwill impairment charge recorded, if any.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2013 and 2012, each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value, indicating that there was no goodwill impairment.
For the annual goodwill impairment analysis in 2013, each reporting unit’s estimated fair value exceeded its carrying value, ranging from approximately 35% to approximately 223%.
The Computing Solutions reporting unit had the lowest excess of fair value over carrying value at 35% due to the decline in the PC market and increased competition.
In estimating the fair value of our reporting units, we took into consideration the challenging industry and market trends that existed as of September 29, 2013, the date of the annual goodwill impairment test for each respective reporting unit.
Estimates of fair value for all of our reporting units can be affected by a variety of external and internal factors.
Potential events or circumstances that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the key assumptions we used in estimating the fair value of our Computing Solutions reporting unit include adverse changes in our industry, increased competition, an inability to successfully introduce new products in the marketplace or to achieve internal forecasts, and a decline in our stock price.
If the estimated fair value of our Computing Solutions reporting unit declines due to any of these factors, we may be required to record future goodwill impairment charges.
In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for tax and financial statement reporting purposes.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets.
If recovery is not likely, we must increase our charge to income tax expense, in the form of a valuation allowance, for the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
We consider past performance, future expected taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance.
In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the Internal Revenue Service or other taxing authority.
If our estimates of these taxes are greater or less than actual results, an additional tax benefit or charge will result.
We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as interest expense and income tax expense.
Management, including the Chief Operating Decision Maker, who is our Chief Executive Officer, reviews and assesses our operating performance using segment net revenue and operating income (loss) before interest, other income (expense), net, and income taxes.
These performance measures include the allocation of expenses to the operating segments based on management’s judgment.
We use the following two reportable segments: the Computing Solutions segment, comprised of x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an APU, chipsets, embedded processors and dense servers; and the Graphics and Visual Solutions segment, comprised of GPUs, including professional graphics, semi-custom SOC products, revenue from development services and royalties for game consoles.
In addition to these reportable segments, we have an All Other category, which is not a reportable segment.
This category includes certain expenses and credits that were not allocated to any of the operating segments because management does not consider these expenses and credits in evaluating the performance of the operating segments.
Also included in this category are amortization of acquired intangible assets, employee stock-based compensation expense, restructuring and other special charges, net, a charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF and a net gain from licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters.
We also reported the results of former businesses in the All Other category because the operating results were not material.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, the primary factors that resulted in those changes and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in December.
The years ended December 28, 2013, December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 included 52 weeks, 52 weeks and 53 weeks, respectively.
The extra week in 2011 did not have a material impact on our results of operations.
References in this report to 2013, 2012 and 2011 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The following table provides a summary of net revenue and operating income (loss) by segment and income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes for 2013, 2012 and 2011.
Dilution gain in investee, net — — 492 Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes $ (74) $(1,217) $ 491 Computing Solutions net revenue of $3.1 billion in 2013 decreased by 22% compared to $4.0 billion in 2012 as a result of a 20% decrease in unit shipments and a 3% decrease in average selling price.
The decrease in unit shipments was primarily attributable to lower unit shipments of our microprocessors and chipset products.
Average selling price of all categories of products decreased in 2013 as compared to 2012.
Unit shipments and average selling price for microprocessor products other than microprocessors for servers and for chipsets decreased primarily due to challenging market conditions and the increasing popularity of tablets as a consumer device of choice, which resulted in decreased demand for our products.
Unit shipments and average selling price of our microprocessors for servers decreased primarily due to challenging market conditions.
Computing Solutions net revenue of $4.0 billion in 2012 decreased by 20% compared to $5.0 billion in 2011 as a result of a 14% decrease in unit shipments and a 7% decrease in average selling price.
Unit shipments of all categories of products decreased in 2012, as compared to 2011.
The decrease in the average selling price was primarily attributable to a decrease in average selling price of our microprocessors for desktop PCs and servers.
Unit shipments and average selling price of our microprocessors for desktop PCs decreased due to challenging market conditions and the increasing popularity of tablets as a consumer device of choice, which resulted in decreased demand for our products.
Unit shipments and average selling price of our microprocessors for servers decreased primarily due to challenging market conditions.
Computing Solutions operating loss was $22 million in 2013 compared to an operating loss of $231 million in 2012.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to a $753 million decrease in cost of sales, a $179 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses and a $178 million decrease in research and development expenses, partially offset by the decrease in net revenue referenced above.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments in 2013 compared to 2012 as well as the absence of the $273 million lower of cost or market charge related to the fee for GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations and an inventory write-down of approximately $100 million during the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A- Series APU products, codenamed “Llano”.
In addition, operating loss for 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of inventory that had been previously reserved in the third quarter of 2012.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Computing Solutions operating loss was $231 million in 2012 compared to operating income of $556 million in 2011.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $136 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses, a $45 million decrease in research and development expenses and a $29 million decrease in cost of sales.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments, partially offset by the $273 million lower of cost or market charge related to the fee for GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations and an inventory write-down of $100 million during the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A-Series APU products.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Graphics and Visual Solutions net revenue of $2.2 billion in 2013 increased by 55% compared to net revenue of $1.4 billion in 2012.
The increase was primarily due to net revenue received in connection with sales of our semi-custom SOC products, which we began shipping in the second quarter of 2013, partially offset by a 16% decrease in net revenue from sales of our GPU products.
Net revenue from sales of GPU products decreased in 2013 compared to 2012 due to lower unit shipments, partially offset by higher average selling price.
GPU unit shipments decreased due to challenging consumer PC market conditions, which adversely impacted demand.
GPU average selling price increased primarily due to improved product mix.
Graphics and Visual Solutions net revenue of $1.4 billion in 2012 decreased by 9% compared to net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2011.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net revenue from sales of GPU products, partially offset by an increase in net revenue received in connection with the development and sale of game console systems that incorporate our graphics technology.
Net revenue from sales of GPU products decreased due to lower unit shipments, partially offset by increased average selling price.
GPU unit shipments decreased due to challenging market conditions.
GPU average selling price increased primarily due to improved product mix.
Graphics and Visual Solutions operating income was $216 million in 2013 compared to $105 million in 2012.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $600 million increase in cost of sales, a $36 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses and a $29 million increase in research and development expenses.
The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to the commencement of unit shipments of our semi-custom SOC products in the second quarter of 2013.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Graphics and Visual Solutions operating income was $105 million in 2012 compared to $51 million in 2011.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to a $101 million decrease in cost of sales, a $60 million decrease in research and development expenses and a $41 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by the decrease in net revenue referenced above.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower GPU shipments and correspondingly lower manufacturing costs.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
All Other revenue pertains to results from former businesses, which were immaterial in 2013, 2012 and 2011.
All Other operating loss of $91 million in 2013 included stock-based compensation expense of $91 million, net restructuring and other special charges of $30 million and $18 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets.
During the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlements regarding patent-related matters, for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash, which we recorded as a gain in operating expense.
All Other operating loss of $930 million in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, $100 million of net restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense of $97 million, $14 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and $6 million related to our acquisition of SeaMicro, Inc. (SeaMicro) in 2012.
All Other operating loss of $239 million in 2011 included $98 million of net restructuring charges, $90 million of stock-based compensation expense, $29 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF primarily related to certain GF manufacturing assets that did not benefit us.
The following is a summary of certain consolidated statement of operations data for 2013, 2012 and 2011.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 37% in 2013 compared to 23% in 2012.
Gross margin in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million and a $5 million charge recorded to cost of sales related to a legal settlement.
Absent the effect of these charges, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 41% in 2012 compared to 37% in 2013.
Gross margin in 2013 was adversely impacted by the lower average gross margins in our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment primarily driven by lower margin semi-custom SOC products, which we began shipping in the second quarter of 2013.
Gross margin in 2012 was adversely impacted by an inventory write-down of $100 million during the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A- Series APU products, codenamed “Llano,” which accounted for two gross margin percentage points.
Gross margin in 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of this previously reserved inventory, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 23% in 2012 compared to 45% in 2011.
Gross margin in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million and a $5 million charge recorded to cost of sales related to a legal settlement.
Gross margin in 2011 included a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF primarily related to certain GF manufacturing assets and a charge of approximately $5 million recorded to cost of sales related to a legal settlement.
Absent the effects of the charges as described above, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 41% in 2012 compared to 45% in 2011.
Gross margin in 2012 was also adversely impacted by the $100 million inventory write-down in the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A-Series APU products as well as lower average selling price for microprocessor products.
Research and development expenses of $1.2 billion in 2013 decreased by $153 million, or 11%, compared to $1.4 billion in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a $178 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $4 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense recorded in the All Other category, partially offset by a $29 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment decreased as a result of a $157 million decrease in product engineering costs and a $41 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses, partially offset by a $20 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
The increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment was primarily due to a $17 million increase in product engineering costs and a $14 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
Research and development expenses of $1.4 billion in 2012, decreased by $99 million, or 7%, compared to $1.5 billion in 2011.
The decrease was due to a $60 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment and a $45 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment, partially offset by a $6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense recorded in the All Other category.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment decreased as a result of a $36 million decrease in product engineering costs, a $16 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense and a $9 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses.
The decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment was primarily due to a $26 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense, an $11 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses related to GF for our future products and a $9 million decrease in product engineering costs.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $674 million in 2013 decreased by $149 million, or 18%, compared to $823 million in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a $179 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $6 million decrease in the All Other category due to the absence of SeaMicro acquisition-related costs recorded in 2012, partially offset by a $36 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment decreased primarily due to a $101 million decrease in sales and marketing activities and an $82 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $5 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expense.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment increased primarily due to a $46 million increase in other general and administrative expenses and a $4 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expense, partially offset by a $12 million decrease in sales and marketing activities.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $823 million in 2012 decreased by $169 million, or 17%, compared to $992 million in 2011, reflecting the effect of the 2011 restructuring plan and our efforts to reduce operating expenses.
The decrease was primarily due to a $136 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $41 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment, partially offset by a $6 million increase in corporate general and administrative expenses attributable to our SeaMicro acquisition, which we recorded in the All Other category.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment decreased primarily due to a $111 million decrease in sales and marketing activities and a $22 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
The decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment was a result of a $24 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses and a $16 million decrease in sales and marketing activities.
During the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash, which we recorded as a gain in operating expenses.
At the time we entered into the agreements, we did not have any future obligations that we were required to perform in order to earn the settlement payments.
Accordingly, we recognized the entire settlement amount in our operating results for the fourth quarter of 2013.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $18 million in 2013, $14 million in 2012 and $29 million in 2011.
The increase from 2012 to 2013 was due to amortization of the intangible assets of SeaMicro, which we acquired in 2012.
The decrease from 2011 to 2012 was due to the reduced amortization base amount of acquired intangible assets, partially offset by our SeaMicro acquisition.
In September 2013, we sold a light industrial building in Singapore and leased back a portion of the original space.
We received net cash proceeds of $46 million in connection with the sale, which resulted in a $17 million gain that we recorded in the third quarter of 2013 and a deferred gain of $14 million (as of September 28, 2013) that we will amortize over the initial operating lease term.
The initial operating lease term expires in September 2023 and provides for options to extend the operating lease for 4 years at the end of the initial lease term and for an additional 3.5 years thereafter.
In September 2013, we also sold an office building in Austin, Texas.
We received net cash proceeds of $10 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $5 million gain in the third quarter of 2013.
In March 2013, we sold and leased back certain land and office buildings in Austin, Texas.
We received net cash proceeds of $164 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $52 million charge in the first quarter of 2013.
The operating lease expires in March 2025 and provides for one 10-year optional renewal.
In March 2013, we also sold an office building in Markham, Ontario, Canada and leased back a portion of the original space through June 2013.
We received net cash proceeds of $13 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $6 million gain in the first quarter of 2013.
The net charge of $24 million recognized in 2013 related to the real estate transactions described above is recorded in the “Restructuring and other special charges, net” line item on the consolidated statements of operations.
In the fourth quarter of 2012, we implemented a restructuring plan designed to improve our cost structure and to strengthen our competitiveness in core growth areas.
The plan primarily involved a workforce reduction of approximately 14% as well as asset impairments and facility consolidations.
We recorded restructuring expense in the fourth quarter of 2012 of approximately $90 million, which was primarily comprised of employee severance.
The non-cash portion of the restructuring expense included approximately $4 million of asset impairments.
In 2013, we incurred costs of $11 million related to facility consolidation and site closures, which were partially offset by the release of estimated employee-related severance costs of $5 million.
The 2012 restructuring plan was completed as of the end of the third quarter of 2013.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we initiated a restructuring plan to strengthen our competitive positioning, implement a more competitive cost structure and conduct a workforce rebalancing to better address faster growing market segments.
The plan included a reduction of workforce of approximately 13% and contract and program terminations.
We recorded a $100 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter of 2011, which consisted of $54 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, $45 million for contract or program termination costs and $1 million for asset impairments.
In 2012, we recorded an additional $8 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits.
The 2011 restructuring plan was completed as of the end of the first quarter of 2012.
The following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities during 2013 and 2012 and the remaining related liabilities recorded in “Accrued and other current liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 28, 2013: In 2011, we reversed approximately $2 million related to costs associated with the 2008 restructuring plan because the actual restoration costs for vacated facilities were lower than previously estimated.
The following table provides a summary of each major type of cost associated with the 2012, 2011 and 2008 restructuring plans for the periods presented: Interest income was $5 million in 2013 compared to $8 million in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in average investments in marketable securities during 2013.
Interest income was $8 million in 2012 compared to $10 million in 2011.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and a decrease in the weighted-average interest rate during 2012.
Interest expense of $177 million in 2013 was relatively flat as compared to $175 million in 2012 and $180 million in 2011.
Other expense, net, in 2013 was $5 million compared to $6 million of other income, net, in 2012 and $199 million of other expense, net, in 2011.
In 2013, we recognized $5 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a $2 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and a $2 million realized loss on sale of our auction rate securities (ARS) investments.
In 2012, we recognized $6 million of other income, net, primarily due to other income recorded in the third quarter of 2012, partially offset by a $5 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and a $4 million other-than-temporary impairment charge related to one of our ARS investments.
In 2011, we recognized an impairment charge on our investment in GF of approximately $209 million and a $6 million loss related to our repurchase of $200 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2015 (6.00% Notes), which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes, partially offset by an $8 million gain on foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
We recorded an income tax provision of $9 million in 2013 and an income tax benefit of $34 million and $4 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively.
The income tax provision in 2013 was primarily due to $9 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations and $3 million related to the reversal of previously recognized tax benefits associated with other comprehensive income, offset by $3 million of tax benefits for Canadian co-op credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
The income tax benefit in 2012 was primarily due to a tax benefit of $36 million relating to our SeaMicro acquisition, a $1 million tax benefit for the tax effects of items credited directly to other comprehensive income, a $2 million tax benefit for Canadian co-op tax credits and a $9 million tax benefit associated with the successful negotiation of a tax holiday in a foreign jurisdiction net of $14 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations.
The income tax benefit in 2011 was primarily due to tax benefits of $4 million from the monetization of U.S. and Canadian tax credits, a As of December 28, 2013, substantially all of our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, continued to be subject to a valuation allowance.
The realization of these assets is dependent on substantial future taxable income which, at December 28, 2013, in management’s estimate, is not more likely than not to be achieved.
On January 2, 2013 the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 (the Act) was passed into law.
The Act included a retroactive extension of the U.S. research credit for 2012.
Since the effects of tax law changes are recognized in the first period which includes the date of enactment, the Act had no impact on our 2012 tax provision.
The impact on our 2013 tax provision was immaterial due to the effects of the valuation allowance.
Stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units for the years ended December 28, 2013, December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 was allocated in our consolidated statements of operations as follows: Total stock-based compensation expense, net of tax of $0 During 2013, 2012 and 2011, we did not realize any excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation and therefore we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows.
Stock-based compensation expense of $91 million in 2013 decreased by $6 million as compared to $97 million in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a lower weighted average grant date fair value and lower stock compensation expense as a result of our 2012 restructuring plan, partially offset by the additional expense related to stock options and restricted stock granted in connection with our SeaMicro acquisition.
Stock-based compensation expenses of $97 million in 2012 increased $7 million compared to $90 million in 2011.
The increase was primarily due to the additional expense related to the equity grants made in connection with our SeaMicro acquisition and an increase in the number of employee stock options and restricted stock units that we granted, partially offset by the absence of a charge related to the acceleration of vesting of all unvested equity incentive awards held by our former Chief Executive Officer in the first quarter of 2011 as a result of his resignation from AMD, effective January 10, 2011, and a lower weighted-average estimated grant date fair value in 2012 as compared to 2011.
As of December 28, 2013, we had $26 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to stock options that will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.90 years.
Also, as of December 28, 2013, we had $112 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to restricted stock and restricted stock units that will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.03 years.
International sales as a percentage of net revenue were 85% in 2013, 92% in 2012 and 93% in 2011.
The decrease in international sales as a percentage of net revenue in 2013 compared 2012 and 2011 was primarily driven by an increase in net revenue from domestic sales of our semi-custom SOC products.
We expect that international sales will continue to be a significant portion of total sales in the foreseeable future.
Substantially all of our sales transactions were denominated in U.S. dollars.
Our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, including long-term marketable securities, were $1.2 billion as of December 28, 2013 and December 29, 2012.
During 2013, our $175 million payment related to GF’s limited waiver of exclusivity and $40 million payment related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 were partially offset by proceeds of $154 million related to building sales, net of purchases of property and equipment.
Also, during the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash.
The percentage of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held domestically was 91% as of December 28, 2013.
Our long-term marketable securities currently consist of corporate bonds and money market funds.
The corporate bonds have maximum stated maturities of two years.
As of December 28, 2013, the fair value of these long-term marketable securities was $90 million.
All of the long-term marketable securities were held in the United States.
Our intent is to hold our long-term marketable securities for greater than one year, and we do not intend to use them in current operations.
During 2013, net proceeds from the maturity of our long-term marketable securities were $91 million.
As a result of narrowing investment yields, we intend to continue to evaluate our investment strategy related to amounts we designate as long-term as such investments mature.
As of December 28, 2013, our total debt was $2.1 billion, which reflects a debt discount adjustment of $43 million on our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Senior Notes due 2017 (8.125% Notes).
In the fourth quarter of 2013, we established a senior secured asset based line of credit for a principal amount up to $500 million (Secured Revolving Line of Credit).
As of December 28, 2013, our outstanding balance under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit was $55 million.
We repurchased $50 million of outstanding principal amount of our 6.00% Notes (which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes).
Subsequent to December 28, 2013, we repurchased an additional $64 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
For 2013, our net cash used in operating activities was $148 million and our non-GAAP free cash flow was negative $232 million.
For 2012, our net cash used in operating activities was $338 million and our non-GAAP free cash flow was negative $471 million.
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP measure which we calculate by adjusting GAAP net cash provided by (used in) operating activities for capital expenditures, which were $84 million for 2013 and $133 million for 2012.
The improvement in our non-GAAP free cash flow for 2013 as compared to 2012 was primarily attributable to a $190 million decrease in net cash used in operating activities as well as a $49 million decrease in capital expenditures.
We calculate and communicate non-GAAP free cash flow because our management believes it is important for investors to understand the nature of these cash flows.
Our calculation of non-GAAP free cash flow may or may not be consistent with the calculation of this measure by other companies in the same industry.
Investors should not view non-GAAP free cash flow as an alternative to GAAP liquidity measures of cash flows from operating or financing activities.
In light of the macroeconomic environment, in the fourth quarter of 2012, we announced a restructuring plan to reduce our operating expenses and better position us competitively.
As a result of our restructuring, we decreased operating expenses by approximately 31% from the first quarter of 2012 to the fourth quarter of 2013.
With the impact of our restructuring plan, the liquidity provided by our Secured Revolving Line of Credit and the availability of external financing, we believe our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, including long-term marketable securities, balance will be sufficient to fund operations, including capital expenditures, over the next twelve months.
We believe that in the event we decide to obtain additional external funding, we will be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives.
However, given the possibility of changes in market conditions or other occurrences, we cannot be certain that such funding will be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
Over the longer term, should additional funding be required, such as to meet payment obligations of our long-term debt when due, we may need to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities, which may be issued from time to time under an effective registration statement, through the issuance of securities in a transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
We cannot assure you that macroeconomic conditions will improve, and they could worsen.
If market conditions do not improve or deteriorate, we may be limited in our ability to access the capital markets to meet liquidity needs on favorable terms or at all, which could adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition, including our ability to refinance maturing liabilities.
During 2013, we realized a loss of $2 million on sales of approximately $28 million of ARS.
We no longer hold any ARS investments as of December 28, 2013.
Net cash used in operating activities was $148 million in 2013.
A net loss of $83 million in 2013 was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of $236 million of depreciation and amortization expenses, $91 million of stock-based compensation expenses, $31 million net loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment and $25 million of non-cash interest expenses related to our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes.
The net changes in operating assets as of December 28, 2013 compared to December 29, 2012 included an increase in inventories of $322 million, largely driven by an increase in Computing Solutions inventory as well as semi-custom SOC products due to our customers’ next generation game console ramps, an increase in accounts receivable of $200 million, which was primarily due to higher sales during the fourth quarter of 2013 compared to the fourth quarter of 2012, an increase in other assets of $92 million, primarily due to new software licenses and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $11 million.
Accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities increased by $266 million in 2013 as compared to 2012, primarily due to a $241 million increase in accounts payable driven by larger purchases of inventory to support higher sales during the fourth quarter of 2013 compared to the fourth quarter of 2012, a $36 million increase in deferred income on shipments to our distributor customers, and a $28 million increase in accrued compensation and benefits, partially offset by a $39 million decrease in other liabilities, primarily due to a decrease in restructuring accruals and payments for technology licenses.
During 2013, our payables to GF, which included all amounts we owe to GF, decreased by $89 million as compared to 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to payments of $175 million related to GF’s limited waiver of exclusivity and $40 million related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012, partially offset by an increase of $126 million of payables related to wafer purchases.
Net cash used in operating activities was $338 million in 2012.
A net loss of $1.2 billion in 2012 was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of a $278 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, $260 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $97 million of stock-based compensation expense and $23 million of non-cash interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes.
These charges were partially offset by a benefit of $40 million for deferred income taxes.
The net changes in operating assets as of December 29, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 included a decrease in accounts receivable of $290 million and an increase in inventories of $83 million, which were primarily due to lower sales during 2012.
During 2012, our payable to GF, which included all amounts that we owe to GF, increased by $277 million as compared to 2011.
The increase was due to cash obligations of $240 million related to the third amendment to the WSA and $175 million related to the limited waiver of exclusivity, partially offset by a decrease of $138 million in the amount of billings related to wafer purchases.
Accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other decreased by $232 million in 2012 as compared to 2011, primarily due to a $94 million decrease in accrued liabilities, a $92 million decrease in accounts payable and other current liabilities, a $23 million decrease in other liabilities, a $15 million decrease in deferred income on shipments to distributors and a $6 million decrease in accrued compensation and benefits.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $382 million in 2011.
Net income of $491 million in 2011 was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of $317 million of depreciation and amortization expense, a $209 million impairment charge on our investment in GF, $90 million of stock based compensation expense, and $21 million of non-cash interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and our 8.125% Notes.
These charges were partially offset by recognition of a non-cash gain of $492 million in 2011 due to the dilution of our equity interest in GF.
The net changes in operating assets at December 31, 2011 compared to December 25, 2010 included an increase in accounts receivable of $347 million, which included the non-cash impact of our previous financing arrangements with International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) and its affiliates.
During 2011, IBM and its affiliates collected approximately $396 million from our distributor customers pursuant to these arrangements.
Without considering the collection by these parties of the accounts receivables that we sold to them, our accounts receivable decreased $49 million in 2011 as compared to 2010.
This decrease was primarily due to timing of sales and collections during 2011.
There was also a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $115 million primarily due to the receipt of the final settlement payment from Samsung of $117 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $455 million in 2013 and primarily consisted of net proceeds of $301 million from the purchase, sale and maturity of available-for-sale securities and net proceeds of $154 million from sales and purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $19 million in 2012.
We had a net cash inflow of $404 million in 2012 from purchases, sales and maturity of available-for-sale securities, partially offset by a net cash outflow of $281 million related to our SeaMicro acquisition, a cash outflow of $133 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment and a cash outflow of $9 million related to other investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $113 million in 2011.
We had a net cash outflow of $234 million in 2011 from the purchase and sale of property, plant and equipment.
The net cash outflows were partially offset by a net cash inflow of $140 million from purchase, sale, and maturity of available-for-sale securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $13 million in 2013, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $55 million, net proceeds from U.S. government grants for research and development activities and foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products of $11 million and $3 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan, partially offset by the repurchase of $50 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes (which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes) in open market transactions and $5 million in payments for capital lease obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $37 million in 2012, primarily due to net proceeds from the issuance of our 7.50% Senior Notes due 2022 (7.50% Notes) of $491 million, $23 million from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities and $14 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan, partially offset by our repayment of outstanding principal and accrued interest on our 5.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2012 and repayment of capital lease obligations of $489 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $6 million in 2011 as a result of payments of $202 million to repurchase $200 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes (which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes).
This amount was partially offset by $170 million of proceeds from our former financing arrangement with IBM and affiliates, $20 million in proceeds from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities, and $18 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan.
During 2013, 2012 and 2011, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows for these periods.
The following table summarizes our consolidated principal contractual cash obligations, as of December 28, 2013, and is supplemented by the discussion following the table: Represents aggregate par value of the notes, without the effect of associated discounts.
Represents estimated aggregate interest obligations for our outstanding debt obligations that are payable in cash, excluding capital lease obligations and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
Also excludes non-cash amortization of debt discounts on our 8.125% Notes and our 6.00% Notes.
We have purchase obligations for goods and services where payments are based, in part, on the volume or type of services we acquire.
In those cases, we only included the minimum volume of purchase obligations in the table above.
Purchase orders for goods and services that are cancelable upon notice and without significant penalties are not included in the amounts above.
In addition we have obligations for software technology and licenses where payments are fixed and non-cancelable.
This amount includes all our contractual obligations to GF through the first quarter of 2014, including a $200 million payment made on December 31, 2013 relating to the $320 million fee due as consideration for a waiver from GF of our purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
On April 27, 2007, we issued $2.2 billion aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
Our 6.00% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year beginning November 1, 2007 until the maturity date of May 1, 2015.
The terms of our 6.00% Notes are governed by an indenture dated April 27, 2007, by and between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
In 2013, we repurchased $50 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes in open market transactions for $53 million.
As of December 28, 2013, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes was $530 million and the remaining carrying value was approximately $517 million, net of debt discount of $13 million.
Subsequent to December 28, 2013, we repurchased an additional $64 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
See Note 11 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 6.00% Notes.
On November 30, 2009, we issued $500 million of our 8.125% Notes at a discount of 10.204%.
Our 8.125% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on June 15 and December 15 of each year beginning June 15, 2010 until the maturity date of December 15, 2017.
The discount of $51 million is recorded as contra debt and is amortized to interest expense over the life of the 8.125% Notes using the effective interest method.
Our 8.125% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated November 30, 2009 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
Starting December 15, 2013, we may redeem the 8.125% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on December 15, 2013 through December 14, 2014 104.063% Beginning on December 15, 2014 through December 14, 2015 102.031% As of December 28, 2013, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 8.125% Notes was $500 million and the remaining carrying value was approximately $470 million, net of debt discount of $30 million.
See Note 11 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 8.125% Notes.
On August 4, 2010, we issued $500 million of our 7.75% Senior Notes Due 2020 (7.75% Notes).
Our 7.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 1 and August 1 of each year beginning February 1, 2011 until the maturity date of August 1, 2020.
Our 7.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated August 4, 2010 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
Starting August 1, 2015, we may redeem our 7.75% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on August 1, 2015 through July 31, 2016                                                                                          103.875% Beginning on August 1, 2016 through July 31, 2017                                                                                          102.583% Beginning on August 1, 2017 through July 31, 2018                                                                                          101.292% As of December 28, 2013, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Notes was $500 million.
See Note 11 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.75% Notes.
On August 15, 2012, we issued $500 million of our 7.50% Notes.
Our 7.50% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year beginning February 15, 2013 until the maturity date of August 15, 2022.
Our 7.50% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated August 15, 2012 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
As of December 28, 2013, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Notes was $500 million.
See Note 11 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.50% Notes.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire our 6.00% Notes, 8.125% Notes, 7.75% Notes and 7.50% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
Subsequent to December 28, 2013, we repurchased an additional $64 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes (which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes).
On November 12, 2013, we and our subsidiary, AMD International Sales & Service, Ltd. (together, the Borrowers), entered into a loan and security agreement (the Loan Agreement) for our Secured Revolving Line of Credit for a principal amount up to $500 million, with up to $75 million available for issuance of letters of credit, with a group of lenders and Bank of America, N.A., acting as agent for the lenders (the Agent).
Borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit are limited to up to 85% of eligible account receivable minus certain reserves and may be used for general corporate purposes, including working capital needs.
The Borrowers can elect that the borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit may bear interest at a rate per annum equal to (a) London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.75%, or (b) (i) the greater of (x) the Agent’s prime rate, (y) the federal funds rate as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York plus 0.50%, and (z) LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1.00%, plus (ii) an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 1.75%.
The applicable margin to be applied to the borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit is dependent on the Borrowers achieving a certain fixed charge coverage ratio.
Our Secured Revolving Line of Credit may be optionally prepaid or terminated or unutilized commitments may be reduced, in each case at any time without premium or penalty.
In connection with our Secured Revolving Line of Credit, the Borrowers are required to pay an unused line fee equal to 0.50% per annum, payable monthly on the unused amount of the commitments under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
The unused line fee decreases to 0.375% per annum when more than 50% of our Secured Revolving Line of Credit is utilized.
The Borrowers will pay (i) a monthly fee on all letters of credit outstanding under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit equal to the applicable LIBOR margin and (ii) a fronting fee to the Agent equal to 0.125% of all such letters of credit, payable monthly in arrears.
The obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by a first priority basis in the Borrowers’ account receivable, inventory and certain deposit accounts and specified related assets.
The Loan Agreement contains covenants that place certain restrictions on the Borrowers’ ability to, among other things, amend or modify certain terms of any debt of $50 million or more or subordinated debt, create or suffer to exist any liens upon accounts or inventory, sell or transfer any of Borrowers’ accounts or inventory other than certain ordinary-course transfers, make certain changes to either Borrower’s name or form or state of organization without notifying the Agent, or liquidate, dissolve, merge, combine or consolidate.
Further restrictions apply during a domestic cash trigger period (a Domestic Cash Trigger Period), which occurs (i) upon an event of default or (ii) when the amount of domestic cash or cash equivalents held in certain accounts is at any time less than $500 million, and ends when both (a) no event of default has existed for 45 days and (b) the amount of domestic cash or cash equivalents held in such accounts has been equal to or greater than $500 million for 45 days.
Such restrictions limit the Borrowers’ ability to, among other things, allow certain subsidiaries that manufacture or process inventory for the Borrowers to borrow secured debt or unsecured debt beyond a certain amount, create any liens upon any of the Borrowers’ property (other than customary permitted liens and liens on up to $1.5 billion of secured credit facilities debt (which amount includes our Secured Revolving Line of Credit)), declare or make any distributions, create any encumbrance on the ability of a subsidiary to make any upstream payments, make asset dispositions other than certain ordinary course dispositions, make certain loans, make payments with respect to subordinated debt or certain borrowed money prior to its due date, become a party to certain agreements restricting the Borrowers’ ability to incur or repay debt, grant liens, make distributions, or modify loan agreements or enter into any non-arm’s-length transaction with an affiliate.
During a Domestic Cash Trigger Period, the Borrowers are required to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio each four-fiscal quarter period ending on and after March 29, 2014.
At December 28, 2013, the outstanding loan balance under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit was $55 million, with an interest rate of 2.75%, and up to $445 million remained available for future borrowings.
As of December 28, 2013, we were in compliance with all required covenants stated in the Loan Agreement.
The agreements governing our 6.00% Notes, 8.125% Notes, 7.75% Notes and 7.50% and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit Notes contain cross-default provisions whereby a default under one agreement would likely result in cross defaults under agreements covering other borrowings.
The occurrence of a default under any of these borrowing arrangements would permit the applicable note holders or the lenders under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit to declare all amounts outstanding under those borrowing arrangements to be immediately due and payable.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above primarily consists of $131 million of payments due under certain software and technology licenses that will be paid through 2017 and $4 million of payments related to employee compensation and benefit obligations that will be paid through 2019 and beyond.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above exclude amounts recorded on our consolidated balance sheet that do not require us to make cash payments, which, as of December 28, 2013, primarily consisted of $23 million of deferred gains resulting from certain real estate transactions that occurred in Sunnyvale, California in 1998, in Markham, Ontario, Canada, in 2008 and in Singapore in 2013.
Also excluded from other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above is $8 million deferred rent related to our facilities in Sunnyvale, California, $5 million restructuring accruals related to our 2012 restructuring plan, and $3 million of non-current unrecognized tax benefits, which is included in the caption “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 28, 2013.
This amount represents a potential cash payment that could be payable by us upon settlement with a taxing authority.
We have not included this amount in the contractual obligations table above because we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate regarding the timing of a settlement with the taxing authority, if any.
As of December 28, 2013, we had aggregate outstanding capital lease obligations of $16 million for one of our facilities in Canada, which is payable in monthly installments through 2017.
We lease certain of our facilities, and in some jurisdictions, we lease the land on which these facilities are built under non-cancelable lease agreements that expire at various dates through 2025.
We lease certain manufacturing and office equipment for terms ranging from 1 to 5 years.
Total future non-cancelable lease obligations as of December 28, 2013 were $388 million, including approximately $322 million of future lease payments and estimated operating costs related to real estate in Austin, Texas, Sunnyvale, California and Singapore that we sold and leased back.
Our purchase obligations primarily include our obligations to purchase wafers and substrates from third parties, excluding our wafer purchase commitments to GF under the WSA.
As of December 28, 2013, total non-cancelable purchase obligations were $456 million.
Obligations to GF represent all of our contractual obligations to GF, including approximately $250 million for inventory purchases during the first quarter of 2014 and other payables under the WSA as described below.
Pursuant to the third amendment to the WSA, GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration for this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee was paid over several quarters, with $80 million paid on December 28, 2012, $40 million paid on April 1, 2013 and $200 million paid on December 31, 2013.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fourth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
As of December 28, 2013, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and long-term debt.
We usually invest our cash in investments with short maturities or with frequent interest reset terms.
Accordingly, our interest income fluctuates with short-term market conditions.
As of December 28, 2013, our investment portfolio consisted primarily of time deposits, commercial paper and corporate bonds.
These investments were highly liquid.
Due to the relatively short, weighted-average maturity of our investment portfolio and the current low interest rate environment, our exposure to interest rate risk is minimal.
As of December 28, 2013, all of our outstanding debt had fixed interest rates.
Consequently, our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates on reported interest expense and corresponding cash flows is minimal.
We will continue to monitor our exposure to interest rate risk.
We mitigate default risk in our investment portfolio by investing in only high credit quality securities and by constantly positioning our portfolio to respond to a significant reduction in a credit rating of any investment issuer or guarantor.
Our portfolio includes investments in debt and marketable equity securities with active secondary or resale markets to ensure portfolio liquidity.
We are averse to principal loss and strive to preserve our invested funds by limiting default risk and market risk.
We actively monitor market conditions and developments specific to the securities and security classes in which we invest.
We believe that we take a conservative approach to investing our funds in that we invest only in highly-rated debt securities with relatively short maturities and do not invest in securities we believe involve a higher degree of risk.
As of December 28, 2013, substantially all of our investments in debt securities were A rated by at least one of the rating agencies.
While we believe we take prudent measures to mitigate investment related risks, such risks cannot be fully eliminated as there are circumstances outside of our control.
During 2013, we realized a loss of $2 million on sales of approximately $28 million of ARS.
We no longer hold any ARS investments as of December 28, 2013.
The following table presents the cost basis, fair value and related weighted-average interest rates by year of maturity for our investment portfolio and debt obligations as of December 28, 2013: Foreign Exchange Risk.
As a result of our foreign operations, we incur costs and we carry assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the Canadian dollar, while sales of products are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars.
We maintain a foreign currency hedging strategy, which uses derivative financial instruments to mitigate the risks associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
This strategy takes into consideration all of our exposures.
We do not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
In applying our strategy, from time to time, we use foreign currency forward contracts to hedge certain forecasted expenses denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the Canadian dollar.
We designate these contracts as cash flow hedges of forecasted expenses, to the extent eligible under the accounting rules, and evaluate hedge effectiveness prospectively and retrospectively.
As such, the effective portion of the gain or loss on these contracts is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and reclassified to earnings in the same line item as the associated forecasted transaction and in the same period during which the hedged transaction affects earnings.
Any ineffective portion is immediately recorded in earnings.
We also use, from time to time, foreign currency forward contracts to economically hedge recognized foreign currency exposures on the balance sheets of various subsidiaries, primarily those denominated in Canadian dollars.
We do not designate these forward contracts as hedging instruments.
Accordingly, the gain or loss associated with these contracts is immediately recorded in earnings.
The following table provides information about our foreign currency forward contracts as of December 28, 2013 and December 29, 2012.
All of our foreign currency forward contracts mature within 12 months.
The statements in this report include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations.
These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date hereof or as of the dates indicated in the statements and should not be relied upon as predictions of future events, as we cannot assure you that the events or circumstances reflected in these statements will be achieved or will occur.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward-looking terminology including “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “pro forma,” “estimates,” “anticipates,” or the negative of these words and phrases, other variations of these words and phrases or comparable terminology.
The forward- looking statements relate to, among other things: demand for AMD’s products; the growth, change and competitive landscape of the markets in which AMD participates; future restructuring activities; the nature and extent of AMD’s future payments to GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF) and the materiality of these payments; the materiality of AMD’s future purchases from GF; Santa Clara lease commencement date; future patent filings; the level of international sales as compared to total sales; its dependence on a small number of customers for a substantial part of its revenue; receipt of license fees relating to the joint ventures between AMD and Tianjin Haiguang Advanced Technology Investment Co., Ltd. (THATIC) (the THATIC JV); expected royalties of future products from the THATIC JV; AMD's expected completion of its restructuring plan implemented in the third quarter of 2015 (the 2015 Restructuring Plan); AMD's expectation that based on the information presently known to management, the securities class action, the shareholder derivative suit and the patent lawsuit will not have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, cash flows or results of operations; that AMD’s cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, the savings from its restructuring plans and the secured revolving line of credit (Secured Revolving Line of Credit) will be sufficient to fund AMD’s operations including capital expenditures over the next 12 months; AMD’s ability to obtain sufficient external financing on favorable terms, or at all; the monitoring of its exposure to interest rate risks; its hedging strategy; its expenditures related to environmental compliance and conflict minerals disclosure requirements; and AMD does not expect to pay dividends in the future.
Material factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, without limitation, the following: Intel Corporation’s dominance of the microprocessor market and its aggressive business practices may limit AMD’s ability to compete effectively; AMD has a wafer supply agreement with GF with obligations to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements, and a certain portion of its GPU product requirements, from GF with limited exceptions.
If GF is not able to satisfy AMD’s manufacturing requirements, its business could be adversely impacted; AMD relies on third parties to manufacture its products, and if they are unable to do so on a timely basis in sufficient quantities and using competitive technologies, AMD’s business could be materially adversely affected; failure to achieve expected manufacturing yields for AMD’s products could negatively impact its financial results; the success of AMD’s business is dependent upon its ability to introduce products on a timely basis with features and performance levels that provide value to its customers while supporting and coinciding with significant industry transitions; if AMD cannot generate sufficient revenue and operating cash flow or obtain external financing, it may face a cash shortfall and be unable to make all of its planned investments in research and development or other strategic investments; the loss of a significant customer may have a material adverse effect on AMD; AMD’s receipt of revenue from its semi-custom SoC products is dependent upon its technology being designed into third-party products and the success of those products; global economic uncertainty may adversely impact AMD’s business and operating results; the markets in which AMD’s products are sold are highly competitive; AMD may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service its debt obligations or meet its working capital requirements; AMD has a substantial amount of indebtedness which could adversely affect its financial position and prevent it from implementing its strategy or fulfilling its contractual obligations; the agreements governing AMD’s notes and the Secured Revolving Line of Credit impose restrictions on AMD that may adversely affect its ability to operate its business; uncertainties involving the ordering and shipment of AMD’s products could materially adversely affect it; the demand for AMD’s products depends in part on the market conditions in the industries into which they are sold.
Fluctuations in demand for AMD’s products or a market decline in any of these industries could have a material adverse effect on its results of operations; AMD’s ability to design and introduce new products in a timely manner is dependent upon third-party intellectual property; AMD depends on third-party companies for the design, manufacture and supply of motherboards, software and other computer platform components to support its business; if AMD loses Microsoft Corporation’s support for its products or other software vendors do not design and develop software to run on AMD’s products, its ability to sell its products could be materially adversely affected; AMD’s reliance on third-party distributors and AIB partners subjects it to certain risks; AMD’s inability to continue to attract and retain qualified personnel may hinder its business; AMD's issuance to West Coast Hitech L.P. (WCH) of warrants to purchase 75 million shares of its common stock, if and when exercised, will dilute the ownership interests of our existing stockholders, and the conversion of the 2.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 may dilute the ownership interest of its existing stockholders, or may otherwise depress the price of our common stock; in the event of a change of control, AMD may not be able to repurchase its outstanding debt as required by the applicable indentures and its Secured Revolving Line of Credit, which would result in a default under the indentures and its Secured Revolving Line of Credit; the semiconductor industry is highly cyclical and has experienced severe downturns that have materially adversely affected, and may continue to materially adversely affect its business in the future; acquisitions, divestitures and/or joint ventures could disrupt its business, harm its financial condition and operating results or dilute, or adversely affect the price of, its common stock; AMD’s business is dependent upon the proper functioning of its internal business processes and information systems and modification or interruption of such systems may disrupt its business, processes and internal controls; data breaches and cyber-attacks could compromise AMD’s intellectual property or other sensitive information, be costly to remediate and cause significant damage to its business and reputation; AMD’s operating results are subject to quarterly and seasonal sales patterns; if essential equipment, materials or manufacturing processes are not available to manufacture its products, AMD could be materially adversely affected; if AMD’s products are not compatible with some or all industry-standard software and hardware, it could be materially adversely affected; costs related to defective products could have a material adverse effect on AMD; if AMD fails to maintain the efficiency of its supply chain as it responds to changes in customer demand for its products, its business could be materially adversely affected; AMD outsources to third parties certain supply-chain logistics functions, including portions of its product distribution, transportation management and information technology support services; the completion and impact of the 2015 Restructuring Plan, its transformation intiatives and any future restructuring actions could adversely affect AMD; AMD may incur future impairments of goodwill; AMD's stock price is subject to volatility; AMD’s worldwide operations are subject to political, legal and economic risks and natural disasters, which could have a material adverse effect on it; worldwide political conditions may adversely affect demand for AMD’s products; unfavorable currency exchange rate fluctuations could adversely affect AMD; AMD’s inability to effectively control the sales of its products on the gray market could have a material adverse effect on it; if AMD cannot adequately protect its technology or other intellectual property in the United States and abroad, through patents, copyrights, trade secrets, trademarks and other measures, it may lose a competitive advantage and incur significant expenses; AMD is a party to litigation and may become a party to other claims or litigation that could cause it to incur substantial costs or pay substantial damages or prohibit it from selling its products; AMD’s business is subject to potential tax liabilities; and AMD is subject to environmental laws, conflict minerals-related provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act as well as a variety of other laws or regulations that could result in additional costs and liabilities.
For a discussion of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, see “Part I, Item 1A-Risk Factors” and the “Financial Condition” section set forth in “Part II, Item 7-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A, beginning on page 35 below and such other risks and uncertainties as set forth below in this report or detailed in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports and filings.
We assume no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
We are a global semiconductor company primarily offering: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated into an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, discrete graphics processing units (GPUs) and professional graphics; and server and embedded processors and semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products and technology for game consoles.
We also license portions of our intellectual property portfolio.
For financial information about geographic areas and for segment information with respect to revenues and operating results, refer to the information set forth in Note 13 of our consolidated financial statements, beginning on page 86 below.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in December.
The years endedDecember 31, 2016, December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 included 53 weeks, 52 weeks and 52 weeks, respectively.
References in this report to 2016, 2015 and 2014 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. (AMD) was incorporated under the laws of Delaware on May 1, 1969 and became a publicly held company in 1972.
Our common stock is currently listed on The NASDAQ Capital Market (NASDAQ) under the symbol “AMD”.
Our mailing address and executive offices are located at One AMD Place, Sunnyvale, California 94085, and our telephone number is (408) 749-4000.
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, Athlon, Opteron, Phenom, Sempron, Turion, FirePro, FreeSync-FX, LiquidVR, Radeon, Geode and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Microsoft, Windows, Direct X, Xbox360 and Xbox One are trademarks or registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other jurisdictions.
PlayStation is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Wii and Wii U are registered trademarks of Nintendo of America, Inc.
ARM is a registered trademark of ARM Limited (or its subsidiaries) in the UK and other countries.
Vulkan and the Vulkan logo are trademarks of Khronos Group, Inc. Other names are for informational purposes only and are used to identify companies and products and may be trademarks of their respective owners.
On the Investor Relations pages of our Website, http://ir.amd.com, we post links to our filings with the SEC, our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Ethics for our executive officers and all other senior finance executives, our Worldwide Standards of Business Conduct, which applies to our Board of Directors and all of our employees, and the charters of the Audit and Finance, Compensation and Leadership Resources, Nominating and Corporate Governance and Innovation and Technology committees of our Board of Directors.
Our filings with the SEC are posted as soon as reasonably practical after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
You can also obtain copies of these documents by writing to us at: Corporate Secretary, AMD, 7171 Southwest Parkway, M/S B100.2, Austin, Texas 78735, or emailing us at: Corporate.Secretary@amd.com.
All of these documents and filings are available free of charge.
If we make substantive amendments to our Code of Ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller or persons performing similar functions, we intend to disclose the nature of such amendment or waiver on our Website.
The information contained on our Website is not incorporated by reference in, or considered to be a part of, this report.
We are a global semiconductor company.
Semiconductors are components used in a variety of electronic products and systems.
An integrated circuit (IC) is a semiconductor device that consists of many interconnected transistors on a single chip.
Since the invention of the transistor in 1948, improvements in IC process and design technologies have led to the development of smaller, more complex and more reliable ICs at a lower cost-per-function.
Developments in IC design and manufacturing process technologies have resulted in significant advances in microprocessor performance.
Since businesses and consumers require greater performance from their computer systems due to the growth of digital data and increasingly sophisticated software applications, multi-core microprocessors offer enhanced overall system performance and efficiency because computing tasks can be spread across two or more processing cores, each of which can execute a task at full speed.
Multi-core microprocessors can simultaneously increase performance of a computer system without greatly increasing the total amount of power consumed and the total amount of heat emitted.
Businesses and consumers also require computer systems with improved power management technology, which helps them to reduce the power consumption of their computer systems, enables smaller and more portable form factors, and lowers the total cost of ownership.
GPUs perform parallel operations on data to render images for the screen and are essential to presenting computer generated images on the screen, decoding and rendering animations and video.
The more sophisticated the GPU, the higher the resolution and the faster and smoother moving objects can be displayed on the screen or in a virtual environment (virtual and augmented realities).
In addition to graphics processing, the parallel operation of GPUs are used on multiple sets of data, increasingly used in vector processor for non-graphics applications that require repetitive computations such as supercomputing, deep neural networks, artificial and machine intelligence, and various embedded applications.
An APU is a processing unit that integrates a CPU and a GPU onto one chip (or one piece of silicon), along with, in some cases, other special-purpose components.
This integration enhances system performance by “offloading” selected tasks to the best-suited component (i.e., the CPU or the GPU) to optimize component use, increasing the speed of data flow between the CPU and GPU through shared memory and allowing the GPU to function as both a graphics engine and an application accelerator.
Having the CPU and GPU on the same chip also typically improves energy efficiency by, for example, eliminating connections between discrete chips.
Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA) describes an industry standard that is an overarching design for having combinations of CPU and GPU processor cores that operate as a unified, integrated engine that shares system responsibilities and resources.
AMD is a founding member of the HSA Foundation, a non-profit organization established to define and promote this open standards-based approach to heterogeneous computing.
Heterogeneous computing allows for the elevation of the GPU to the same level of the CPU for memory access, queuing and execution.
This capability allows software programmers to develop applications to more fully utilize graphics capabilities.
Our microprocessors are incorporated into computing platforms, which are a collection of technologies that are designed to work together to provide a more complete computing solution and to enable and advance the computing components.
We believe that integrated, balanced computing platforms consisting of microprocessors, chipsets (either as discrete devices or integrated into an SoC) and GPUs (either as discrete GPUs or integrated into an APU or SoC) that work together at the system level bring end users improved system stability, increased performance and enhanced power efficiency.
In addition, we believe our customers also benefit from an all-AMD platform (consisting of an APU or CPU, a discrete GPU, and an AMD Fusion Controller Hub chip when needed), as we are able to optimize interoperability, provide our customers a single point of contact for the key platform components and enable them to bring the platforms to market faster in a variety of client and server system form factors.
We currently base our microprocessors and chipsets on the x86 instruction set architecture and AMD’s Direct Connect Architecture, which connects an on-chip memory controller and input/output (I/O) channels directly to one or more microprocessor cores.
We typically integrate two or more processor cores onto a single die, and each core has its own dedicated cache, which is memory that is located on the semiconductor die, permitting quick access to frequently used data and instructions.
Some of our microprocessors have additional levels of cache such as L2, or second-level cache, and L3, or third-level cache, to enable faster data access and higher performance.
We focus on continually improving the energy efficiency of our products through our design principles and innovations in power management technology.
To that end, we offer CPUs, GPUs, APUs, SoCs and chipsets with multiple low power states that are designed to utilize lower clock speeds and voltages to reduce processor power consumption during active and idle times.
The use of intelligent, dynamic power management is designed to create lower energy use by allowing compute applications to be completed quickly and efficiently, enabling a return to the ultra-low power idle state.
We offer enterprise-class desktop and notebook PC solutions sold as AMD PRO for the commercial client market.
AMD PRO solutions are designed to provide commercial-grade quality, platform longevity and extended image stability, and also include security and manageability features for enterprise customers.
In October 2016, we announced the first PCs featuring 7th Generation AMD PRO APUs (formerly codenamed “Bristol Ridge PRO”).
These AMD PRO APUs are built for businesses and designed to deliver increased computing and graphics performance and improved energy efficiency, while providing a secure and stable platform to protect customers’ IT investments.
The semiconductor graphics market addresses the need for improved visual and data processing in various computing devices.
Many consumers value a rich visual experience to enable a more compelling and immersive experience, and, for these consumers, the PC has evolved from a traditional data processing and communications device to an entertainment platform.
As a result, visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key product differentiation elements among computing devices.
This has led to increasing creation and use of processing-intensive multimedia content for computing devices, including playing games, capturing media content, viewing online videos, editing photos and managing digital content.
In turn, these trends have contributed to higher consumer demand for performance graphics solutions and to manufacturers designing computing devices with these capabilities.
Graphics processing is a fundamental component of almost everything we create and can be found in an APU, GPU, SoC or a combination of a GPU with one of the other foregoing products working in tandem.
Our customers generally use our graphics solutions to increase the speed of rendering images, to help improve image resolution and color definition, and increasingly to process massive data sets for cloud and datacenter applications.
We develop our graphics products for use in various computing devices and entertainment platforms, including desktop PCs, notebook PCs, 2-in-1s, All-in-Ones (AIOs), professional workstations, and the datacenter.
With each of our graphics products, we have available drivers and supporting software packages that enable the effective use of these products under a variety of operating systems and applications.
In addition, our recent Radeon Pro Software Crimson ReLive Edition now supports Linux®.
The Linux version of this driver combines an open-source core and AMD Radeon Pro graphics' technologies and performance.
Our APUs deliver visual processing functionality for value and mainstream PCs by integrating a CPU and a GPU on a single chip, while discrete GPUs (which are also known as dGPUs) offer high performance graphics processing across all platforms.
AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing or General Purpose GPU (GPGPU) refers to a set of advanced hardware and software technologies that enable discrete AMD GPUs, working in concert with the CPU, to accelerate computational tasks beyond traditional CPU processing by utilizing the vast number of discrete GPU cores while working with the CPU to process information cooperatively.
In addition, computing devices with heterogeneous computing features run computationally-intensive tasks more efficiently, which we believe provides a superior application experience to the end user.
Moreover, heterogeneous computing allows for the elevation of the GPU to the same level as the CPU for memory access, queuing and execution.
Our discrete GPUs for desktop and notebook PCs are designed to enable next generation application program interface (APIs) like DirectX® 12 and Vulkan™, support new displays using FreeSync™ technology, and are uniquely positioned to help drive the next visual revolution of virtual reality (VR) in PC platforms.
In March 2016, we introduced the Radeon Pro Duo GPU with the LiquidVR™ SDK platform designed for many aspects of VR content creation: from entertainment to education, journalism, medicine and cinema.
In June 2016, we launched our first GPU featuring our Polaris architecture, the Radeon™ RX 480 GPU.
Our Polaris architecture features our latest 4th Generation Graphics Core Next (GCN), along with the latest display technology support and performance per watt capabilities, all based on a FinFET 14 process technology.
In July 2016, we revealed our new Radeon Pro SSG GPU with the ability to expand GPU storage up to 1 terabyte (TB) and which is designed for media and entertainment professionals.
We also announced our new Radeon Pro WX series GPUs, which are based on our Polaris architecture and are designed for workstation professionals and creators.
In August 2016, we introduced the new Radeon RX 470, targeted at high definition (HD) resolutions for gamers.
Also in August 2016, we released the new Radeon RX 460 graphics card with an ultra-quiet cooling solution and sub-75W power footprint for mainstream and e-sports gaming.
We also provide the AMD FirePro S-Series GPU products for the server market, where we target high performance computing (HPC) primarily focused on artificial and machine intelligence, deep neutral networks (DNN), geosciences, biosciences, academic and government workloads, and virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) use cases primarily focused on workstation-class virtualization, remote desktop and content streaming workloads.
In April 2016, we announced the AMD FirePro W9100 with 32 gigabyte (GB) of memory support designed for large workflows with creative applications.
In May 2016, we announced an AMD Multiuser GPU (MxGPU) for blade servers, the AMD FirePro S7100X GPU, designed to provide a “workstation-class” experience for up to 16 users that is practically indistinguishable from a native desktop experience.
In November 2016, we announced a new release of Radeon Open Compute Platform (ROCm) featuring software support of the new Radeon GPU hardware, new math libraries, and a rich foundation of modern programming languages, designed to speed development of high-performance, energy efficient heterogeneous computing systems.
Embedded products address computing needs in PC-adjacent markets, such as industrial control and automation, digital signage, point-of-sale/self- service kiosks, medical imaging and casino gaming machines as well as enterprise class telecommunications, networking, security, storage systems and thin clients (which are computers that serve as an access device on a network).
Typically, our embedded products are used in applications that require high to moderate levels of performance, where key features may include mobility, relatively low power, small form factor, and 24x7 operations.
High-performance graphics are increasingly important in many embedded systems.
Support for Linux®, Windows® and other operating systems as well as for increasingly sophisticated applications are also critical for some customers.
Other requirements may include meeting rigid specifications for industrial temperatures, shock, vibration and reliability.
The embedded market has moved from developing proprietary, custom designs to leveraging industry-standard instruction set architectures and processors as a way to help reduce costs and speed time to market.
Our embedded processors are increasingly driving intelligence into new areas of our lives, like interactive digital signage, casino gaming, and medical imaging devices.
These products are designed to support greater connectivity and productivity, and we believe they are a strong driver for the “internet of things” and “immersive computing” areas in the computing industry.
Our processor products for embedded platforms include AMD Embedded R-Series APU and CPUs, AMD Embedded G-Series SoC platform and AMD Embedded Radeon™ GPUs.
In February 2016, we announced our 3 rd Generation AMD Embedded G-Series SoCs and the Embedded G-Series LX SoC, providing customers a broadened portfolio of performance options.
The 3rd Generation AMD Embedded G-Series SoCs, introduced for the first time pin compatibility between the G-Series family and the higher performance AMD Embedded R-Series family.
Pin compatibility allows for devices to share the same package and pin-out so that customers can design one board and change the processor on the board without changing the board design.
In September 2016, we announced two new AMD Embedded Radeon graphics cards, the AMD Embedded Radeon E9260 and the AMD Embedded Radeon E9550 discrete GPU products.
These GPUs bring our Polaris architecture to the embedded markets and are designed elevate the level of GPU processing performance available to embedded customers.
Our semi-custom products are tailored, high-performance, customer-specific solutions based on AMD’s CPU, GPU and multi-media technologies.
We work closely together with our customers to define solutions to precisely match the requirements of the device or application.
Historically we have leveraged our core graphics processing technology into the game console market by licensing our graphic technology in game consoles such as the Microsoft® Xbox 360™ and Nintendo Wii and Wii U.
More recently, we developed the semi-custom SoC products that power the Sony PlayStation ® 4 and new PlayStation® 4 Pro and Microsoft® Xbox One™ and Xbox One S™ game consoles.
We sell our products through our direct sales force and through independent distributors and sales representatives in both domestic and international markets.
Our sales arrangements generally operate on the basis of product forecasts provided by the particular customer, but do not typically include any commitment or requirement for minimum product purchases.
We primarily use purchase orders, sales order acknowledgments and contractual agreements as evidence of our sales arrangements.
Our agreements typically contain standard terms and conditions covering matters such as payment terms, warranties and indemnities for issues specific to our products.
We generally warrant that our products sold to our customers will conform to our approved specifications and be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and conditions for one year.
Subject to certain exceptions, we also offer a three-year limited warranty to end users for those CPU and AMD A-Series APU products purchased as individually packaged products, commonly referred to as “processors in a box”, and for PC workstation products.
We have also offered extended limited warranties to certain customers of “tray” microprocessor products and/or workstation graphics products who have written agreements with us and target their computer systems at the commercial and/or embedded markets.
We market and sell our latest products under the AMD trademark.
Our desktop PC product brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series, AMD E-Series, AMD FX CPU, AMD Athlon CPU and APU, AMD Sempron™ APU and CPU and AMD Pro A-Series APU.
Our notebook and 2-in-1s for microprocessors are AMD A- Series, AMD E-Series, AMD C-Series, AMD Z-Series, AMD FX APU, AMD Phenom™, AMD Athlon CPU and APU, AMD Turion™ and AMD Sempron APU and CPU.
Our server brand for microprocessors is AMD Opteron™.
We also sell low-power versions of our AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron, as well as AMD Geode™, AMD R-Series and G-Series processors as embedded processor solutions.
Our product brand for the consumer graphics market is AMD Radeon, and AMD Embedded Radeon is our product brand for the embedded graphics market.
Our product brand for professional graphics products is AMD FirePro™.
We also market and sell our chipsets under the AMD trademark.
We market our products through our direct marketing and co-marketing programs.
In addition, we have cooperative advertising and marketing programs with customers and third parties, including market development programs, pursuant to which we may provide product information, training, marketing materials and funds.
Under our co-marketing development programs, eligible customers can use market development funds as reimbursement for advertisements and marketing programs related to our products and third-party systems integrating our products, subject to meeting defined criteria.
Our microprocessor customers consist primarily of original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), original design manufacturers (ODMs), system builders and independent distributors in both domestic and international markets.
ODMs provide design and/or manufacturing services to branded and unbranded private label resellers, OEMs and system builders.
Our graphics product customers include the foregoing as well as add-in-board manufacturers (AIBs).
Customers of our chipset products consist primarily of PC and server OEMs, often through ODMs or other contract manufacturers, who build the OEM motherboards, as well as desktop and server motherboard manufacturers who incorporate chipsets into their channel motherboards.
We work closely with our customers to define product features, performance and timing of new products so that the products we are developing meet our customers’ needs.
We also employ application engineers to assist our customers in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products.
We believe that our commitment to customer service and design support improves our customers’ time-to-market and fosters relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
We also work with our customers to create differentiated products that leverage our CPU, GPU and APU technology.
Customers of our semi-custom products pay us non-recurring engineering fees for design and development services and a purchase price for the resulting semi-custom products.
Our major customers, Sony Corporation, Microsoft Corporation and HP Inc., each accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2016.
Sales to Sony and Microsoft consisted of products from our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and sales to HP Inc. consisted primarily of products from our Computing and Graphics segment.
A loss of any of these customers would have a material adverse effect on our business.
We focus on three types of OEM customers: multi-nationals, selected regional accounts and target market customers.
Large multi-nationals and regional accounts are our core OEM customers.
Our OEM customers include numerous foreign and domestic manufacturers of servers and workstations, desktops, notebooks, PC motherboards and game consoles.
Typically, distributors handle a wide variety of products, and may include those that compete with our products.
Distributors typically maintain an inventory of our products.
In most instances, our agreements with distributors protect their inventory of our products against price reductions and provide return rights with respect to any product that we have removed from our price book that is not more than 12 months older than the manufacturing code date.
In addition, some agreements with our distributors may contain standard stock rotation provisions permitting limited levels of product returns.
We offer component-level graphics and chipset products to AIB manufacturers who in turn build and sell board-level products using our technology to system integrators (SIs), retail buyers and sub distributors.
Our agreements with AIBs protect their inventory of our products against price reductions.
We also sell directly to our SI customers.
SIs typically sell from positions of regional or product-based strength in the market.
They usually operate on short design cycles and can respond quickly with new technologies.
SIs often use discrete graphics solutions as a means to differentiate their products and add value to their customers.
Generally, the IC industry is intensely competitive.
Products typically compete on timely product introductions, product quality (including enabling state-of-the art visual experiences), power consumption (including battery life), reliability, processor clock speed, performance, size (or form factor), selling price, cost, adherence to industry standards (and the creation of open industry standards), level of integration, software and hardware compatibility and stability, brand recognition and availability.
Technological advances in the industry can result in frequent product introductions, regular price reductions and short product life cycles for some products, and increased product capabilities that may result in significant performance improvements.
Our ability to compete depends on our ability to develop, introduce and sell new products or enhanced versions of existing products on a timely basis and at competitive prices with competitive costs.
Intel Corporation has been the market share leader for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to influence customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past resulted in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for many of our products and adversely affected our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, which can make them less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, can become distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards and specifications for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions which may limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners that require or result in exclusive product arrangements; de facto control over industry standards, and heavy influence on PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its market position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel has introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Intel’s position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and lower average selling prices for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Other competitors include a variety of companies providing or developing ARM-based designs at relatively low cost and low power processors for the computing market including tablets and thin-client form factors, as well as dense servers, set-top boxes and gaming consoles.
ARM Holdings designs and licenses its ARM architecture to third parties, including us, and offers supporting software and services.
Our ability to compete with companies who use ARM-based solutions depends on our ability to timely design and bring to market energy-efficient, high-performing products at an attractive price point.
In the chipset market, our competitors include suppliers of IGP chipsets.
PC manufacturers use IGP chipsets because they typically cost less than traditional discrete GPUs while offering acceptable graphics performance for most mainstream PC users.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its IGP chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells IGP chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is our main competitor in this market.
In the graphics market, our competitors include suppliers of discrete graphics, embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets, and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
Higher unit shipments of our APUs and Intel’s integrated graphics may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for notebooks, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could take actions that place our discrete GPUs and IGP chipsets at a competitive disadvantage such as giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Our principal competitor in the graphics market is Nvidia.
AMD and Nvidia are the two principal companies offering discrete graphics solutions.
Other competitors include a number of smaller companies, which may have greater flexibility to address specific market needs, but less financial resources to do so, especially as we believe that the growing complexity of graphics processors and the associated research and development costs represent an increasingly higher barrier to entry in this market.
In the semi-custom game console products, where graphics performance is critical, we compete primarily against Nvidia.
We focus our research and development activities on improving product performance and enhancing product design.
Our main area of focus is on delivering the next generation of CPU and GPU IP, and designing that IP into our SoCs for our next generation of products, with, in each case, improved system performance and performance-per-watt characteristics.
For example, we are focusing on improving the battery life of our APU products for notebooks, the power efficiency of our microprocessors for servers and the performance and power efficiency of our discrete GPUs.
We are also focusing on delivering a range of low-power integrated platforms to serve key markets, including commercial clients, mobile computing and gaming.
We believe that these platforms will bring customers increased performance and energy efficiency.
We also work with industry leaders on process technology, software and other functional intellectual property and with others in the industry and industry consortia to conduct early stage research and development.
Our research and development expenses for 2016, 2015 and 2014 were approximately $1.0 billion, $0.9 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively.
For more information, see “Part II, Item 7-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” below.
We conduct product and system research and development activities for our products in the United States with additional design and development engineering teams located in China, Canada, India, Singapore and Taiwan.
Manufacturing Arrangements and Assembly and Test Facilities Wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our test, assembly and packaging partners located in the Asia-Pacific region who package and test our final semiconductor products.
On April 29, 2016, we and certain of our subsidiaries completed the sale of a majority of the equity interests in two of our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities, Suzhou TF-AMD Semiconductor Co., Ltd. (formerly, AMD Technologies (China) Co., Ltd.) and TF AMD Microelectronics (Penang) Sdn.
to affiliates of Tongfu Fujitsu Microelectronics, Co., Ltd., or TFME (formerly, Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd.) to form two joint ventures (each an “ATMP JV”).
As a result of the sale, TFME’s affiliates own 85% of the equity interests in each ATMP JV while certain of our subsidiaries own the remaining 15%.
We rely on contracts and intellectual property rights to protect our products and technologies from unauthorized third-party copying and use.
Intellectual property rights include copyrights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, trade secrets and mask work rights.
As of December 31, 2016, we had approximately 5,033 patents in the United States and approximately 913 patent applications pending in the United States.
In certain cases, we have filed corresponding applications in foreign jurisdictions.
Including United States and foreign matters, we have approximately 10,767 patent matters worldwide consisting of approximately 7,814 issued patents and 2,953 patent applications pending.
We expect to file future patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions, as we deem appropriate.
We do not believe that any individual patent, or the expiration of any patent, is or would be material to our business.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, we have numerous cross-licensing and technology exchange agreements with other companies under which we both transfer and receive technology and intellectual property rights.
One such agreement is the cross-license agreement that we entered into with Intel on November 11, 2009.
Under the cross-license agreement, we granted to Intel and Intel granted to us, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all of each other’s patents that were first filed no later than November 11, 2014 and each party can exploit these patents anywhere in the world for making and selling certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products.
Under the cross-license agreement, Intel has rights to make semiconductor products for third parties, but the third-party product designs are not licensed as a result of such manufacture.
We have rights to perform assembly and testing for third parties but not rights to make semiconductor products for third parties.
The term of the cross-license agreement continues until the expiration of the last to expire of the licensed patents, unless earlier terminated.
A party can terminate the cross-license agreement or the rights and licenses of the other party if the other party materially breaches the cross-license agreement and does not correct the noticed material breach within 60 days.
Upon such termination, the terminated party’s license rights terminate but the terminating party’s license rights continue, subject to that party’s continued compliance with the terms of the cross-license agreement.
The cross-license agreement will automatically terminate if a party undergoes a change of control (as defined in the cross license agreement), and both parties’ licenses will terminate.
Upon the bankruptcy of a party, that party may assume, but may not assign, the cross-license agreement, and in the event that the cross-license agreement cannot be assumed, the cross-license agreement and the licenses granted will terminate.
Sales are made primarily pursuant to purchase orders for current delivery or agreements covering purchases over a period of time.
Some of these orders or agreements may be revised or canceled without penalty.
Generally, in light of current industry practice, we do not believe that such orders or agreements provide meaningful backlog figures or are necessarily indicative of actual sales for any succeeding period.
Our operating results tend to vary seasonally.
For example, historically, first quarter PC product sales are generally lower than fourth quarter sales.
In addition, with respect to our semi-custom SoC products for game consoles, we expect sales patterns to follow the seasonal trends of a consumer business with sales in the first half of the year being lower than sales in the second half of the year.
As of December 31, 2016, we had approximately 8,200 employees.
Our operations and properties have in the past been and continue to be subject to various United States and foreign environmental laws and regulations, including those relating to materials used in our products and manufacturing processes, discharge of pollutants into the environment, the treatment, transport, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes and remediation of contamination.
These laws and regulations require us to obtain permits for our operations, including the discharge of air pollutants and wastewater.
Although our management systems are designed to maintain compliance, we cannot assure you that we have been or will be at all times in complete compliance with such laws, regulations and permits.
If we violate or fail to comply with any of them, a range of consequences could result, including fines, suspension of production, alteration of manufacturing processes, import/export restrictions, sales limitations, criminal and civil liabilities or other sanctions.
We could also be held liable for any and all consequences arising out of exposure to hazardous materials used, stored, released, disposed of by us or located at, under or emanating from our facilities or other environmental or natural resource damage.
While we have budgeted for foreseeable associated expenditures, we cannot assure you that future environmental legal requirements will not become more stringent or costly in the future.
Therefore, we cannot assure you that our costs of complying with current and future environmental and health and safety laws, and our liabilities arising from past and future releases of, or exposure to, hazardous substances will not have a material adverse effect on us.
Environmental laws are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time.
For example, the European Union (EU) and China are two among a growing number of jurisdictions that have enacted restrictions on the use of lead and other materials in electronic products.
These regulations affect semiconductor devices and packaging.
As regulations restricting materials in electronic products continue to increase around the world, there is a risk that the cost, quality and manufacturing yields of products that are subject to these restrictions, may be less favorable compared to products that are not subject to such restrictions, or that the transition to compliant products may not meet customer roadmaps, or produce sudden changes in demand, which may result in excess inventory.
A number of jurisdictions including the EU, Australia and China are developing or have finalized market entry or public procurement regulations for computers and servers based on ENERGY STAR specifications as well as additional energy consumption limits.
There is the potential for certain of our products being excluded from some of these markets which could materially adversely affect us.
Certain environmental laws, including the U.S. Comprehensive, Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, or the Superfund Act, impose strict or, under certain circumstances, joint and several liability on current and previous owners or operators of real property for the cost of removal or remediation of hazardous substances and impose liability for damages to natural resources.
These laws often impose liability even if the owner or operator did not know of, or was not responsible for, the release of such hazardous substances.
These environmental laws also assess liability on persons who arrange for hazardous substances to be sent to disposal or treatment facilities when such facilities are found to be contaminated.
Such persons can be responsible for cleanup costs even if they never owned or operated the contaminated facility.
We have been named as a responsible party at three Superfund sites in Sunnyvale, California.
Although we have not yet been, we could be named a potentially responsible party at other Superfund or contaminated sites in the future.
In addition, contamination that has not yet been identified could exist at our other facilities.
Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) adopted disclosure and reporting requirements for companies that use “conflict” minerals originating from the Democratic Republic of Congo or adjoining countries.
We continue to incur additional costs associated with complying with these requirements, such as costs related to developing internal controls for the due diligence process, determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products, auditing the process and reporting to our customers and the SEC.
Also, since our supply chain is complex, we may face reputational challenges if we are unable to sufficiently verify the origins of the subject minerals.
Moreover, we are likely to encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the components of our products are certified as “conflict free.” If we cannot satisfy these customers, they may choose a competitor’s products.
The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face.
If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
In addition, you should consider the interrelationship and compounding effects of two or more risks occurring simultaneously.
Intel Corporation has been the market share leader for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to influence customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for many of our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards and specifications for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; de facto control over industry standards, and heavy influence on PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its original equipment manufacturer OEM customers.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its market position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel has introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Intel’s position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
The WSA is in place until 2024.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements, and a portion of our GPU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
If GF is unable to achieve anticipated manufacturing yields, remain competitive using or implementing advanced leading-edge process technologies needed to manufacture future generations of our products, manufacture our products on a timely basis at competitive prices or meet our capacity requirements, then we may experience delays in product launches, supply shortages for certain products or increased costs and our business could be materially adversely affected.
Moreover, if GF is unable to satisfy our manufacturing requirements and we are unable to secure from GF additional exceptions allowing us to contract with another wafer foundry to satisfy those requirements, then our business could be materially adversely affected.
In August 2016, we entered into the sixth amendment to the WSA (Sixth Amendment) pursuant to which we agreed to certain annual wafer purchase targets through 2020, and if we fail to meet the agreed wafer purchase target during a calendar year we will be required to pay to GF a portion of the difference between our actual wafer purchases and the applicable annual purchase target.
If our actual wafer requirements are less than the number of wafers required to meet the applicable annual wafer purchase target, we could have excess inventory or higher inventory unit costs, both of which may adversely impact our gross margin and our results of operations.
In addition, GF has relied on Mubadala Technology Investments LLC (Mubadala Tech) for its funding needs.
If Mubadala Tech fails to adequately fund GF on a timely basis, or at all, GF’s ability to manufacture products for us could be materially adversely affected.
We rely on third-party wafer foundries to fabricate the silicon wafers for all of our products.
We also rely on third-party manufacturers to assemble, test, mark and pack (ATMP) our products.
It is important to have reliable relationships with all of these third-party manufacturing suppliers to ensure adequate product supply to respond to customer demand.
We cannot guarantee that these manufacturers or our other third-party manufacturing suppliers will be able to meet our near-term or long-term manufacturing requirements.
If we experience supply constraints from our third-party manufacturing suppliers, we may be required to allocate the affected products amongst our customers, which could have a material adverse effect on our relationships with these customers and on our financial condition.
In addition, if we are unable to meet customer demand due to fluctuating or late supply from our manufacturing suppliers, it could result in lost sales and have a material adverse effect on our business.
We do not have long-term commitment contracts with some of our third-party manufacturing suppliers.
We obtain some of these manufacturing services on a purchase order basis and these manufacturers are not required to provide us with any specified minimum quantity of product beyond the quantities in an existing purchase order.
Accordingly, we depend on these suppliers to allocate to us a portion of their manufacturing capacity sufficient to meet our needs, to produce products of acceptable quality and at acceptable manufacturing yields and to deliver those products to us on a timely basis and at acceptable prices.
The manufacturers we use also fabricate wafers and assemble, test and package products for other companies, including certain of our competitors.
They could choose to prioritize capacity for other customers, increase the prices that they charge us on short notice or reduce or eliminate deliveries to us, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
Other risks associated with our dependence on third-party manufacturers include limited control over delivery schedules and quality assurance, lack of capacity in periods of excess demand, misappropriation of our intellectual property, dependence on several small undercapitalized subcontractors and limited ability to manage inventory and parts.
Moreover, if any of our third-party manufacturers suffer any damage to facilities, lose benefits under material agreements, experience power outages, lack sufficient capacity to manufacture our products, encounter financial difficulties, are unable to secure necessary raw materials from their suppliers or suffer any other disruption or reduction in efficiency, we may encounter supply delays or disruptions.
If we are unable to secure sufficient or reliable supplies of products, our ability to meet customer demand may be adversely affected and this could materially affect our business.
If we transition the production of some of our products to new manufacturers, we may experience delayed product introductions, lower yields or poorer performance of our products.
If we experience problems with product quality or are unable to secure sufficient capacity from a particular third-party manufacturer, or if we for other reasons cease utilizing one of those suppliers, we may be unable to secure an alternative supply for any specific product in a short time frame.
We could experience significant delays in the shipment of our products if we are required to find alternative third-party manufacturers, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.
In April 2016, we consummated a transaction with Tongfu Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd. (formerly, Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd.) (TFME), under which we sold to TFME 85% of the equity interests in our ATMP facilities consisting
The statements in this report include forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations.
These forward- looking statements should not be relied upon as predictions of future events as we cannot assure you that the events or circumstances reflected in these statements will be achieved or will occur.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward-looking terminology including “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “pro forma,” “estimates,” or “anticipates” or the negative of these words and phrases or other variations of these words and phrases or comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements relate to, among other things: demand for our products; the growth, change and competitive landscape of the markets in which we participate; our ability to obtain sufficient external financing on favorable terms, or at all; the nature and extent of our future payments to GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF) and the materiality of these payments; the materiality of our future purchases from GF; our ability to negotiate a fourth amendment to the WSA with GF; future patent applications; sales patterns of our semi-custom System-on-Chip products for game consoles; expenditures related to environmental compliance and conflict minerals disclosure requirements; PC market conditions; the success of our transformation strategy; our ability to transform our business to attain approximately 50% of revenue from high-growth markets by the end of 2015; the decline of royalty revenue received from third parties as we transition to a semi-custom business model; the level of international sales as compared to total sales; that we will sample our first ARM technology-based AMD Opteron™ processor for servers in the first quarter of 2014; that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and available external financing will be sufficient to fund our operations including capital expenditures over the next twelve months; our dependence on a small number of customers; our hedging strategy; and the timing of the implementation of certain ENERGYSTAR specifications.
Material factors and assumptions that were applied in making these forward-looking statements include, without limitation, the following: the expected rate of market growth and demand for our products and technologies (and the mix thereof); GF’s manufacturing yields and wafer volumes; our expected market share; our expected product costs and average selling price; our overall competitive position and the competitiveness of our current and future products; our ability to introduce new products, consistent with our current roadmap; our ability to make additional investment in research and development and that such opportunities will be available; the expected demand for computers; and the state of credit markets and macroeconomic conditions.
Material factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, without limitation, the following: that Intel Corporation’s pricing, marketing and rebating programs, product bundling, standard setting, new product introductions or other activities may negatively impact our plans; that we will require additional funding and may be unable to raise sufficient capital on favorable terms, or at all; that customers stop buying our products or materially reduce their operations or demand for our products; that we may be unable to develop, launch and ramp new products and technologies in the volumes that are required by the market at mature yields on a timely basis; that our third-party foundry suppliers will be unable to transition our products to advanced manufacturing process technologies in a timely and effective way or to manufacture our products on a timely basis in sufficient quantities and using competitive process technologies; that we will be unable to obtain sufficient manufacturing capacity or components to meet demand for our products or will not fully utilize our projected manufacturing capacity needs at GF’s microprocessor manufacturing facilities; that our requirements for wafers will be less than the fixed number of wafers that we agreed to purchase from GF or GF encounters problems that significantly reduce the number of functional die we receive from each wafer; that we are unable to successfully implement our long-term business strategy; that we inaccurately estimate the quantity or type of products that our customers will want in the future or will ultimately end up purchasing, resulting in excess or obsolete inventory; that we are unable to manage the risks related to the use of our third-party distributors and add-in-board (AIB) partners or offer the appropriate incentives to focus them on the sale of our products; that we may be unable to maintain the level of investment in research and development that is required to remain competitive; that there may be unexpected variations in market growth and demand for our products and technologies in light of the product mix that we may have available at any particular time; that global business and economic conditions will not improve or will worsen; that PC market conditions do not improve or will worsen; that demand for computers will be lower than currently expected; and the effect of political or economic instability, domestically or internationally, on our sales or supply chain.
For a discussion of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, see “Part I, Item 1A—Risk Factors” and the “Financial Condition” section set forth in “Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A, beginning on page 41 below and such other risks and uncertainties as set forth below in this report or detailed in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports and filings.
We assume no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
We are a global semiconductor company with facilities around the world.
Within the global semiconductor industry, we offer primarily: Computing Solutions—comprised of x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, embedded processors and dense servers; and Graphics and Visual Solutions—comprised of graphics processing units (GPUs), including professional graphics, semi-custom System-on-Chip (SOC) products, development services and technology for game consoles.
For financial information about geographic areas and for segment information with respect to revenues and operating results, refer to the information set forth in Note 13 of our consolidated financial statements, beginning on page 96 below.
We were incorporated under the laws of Delaware on May 1, 1969 and became a publicly held company in 1972.
Since 1979, our common stock has been listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “AMD.” Our mailing address and executive offices are located at One AMD Place, Sunnyvale, California 94088, and our telephone number is (408) 749-4000.
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, ATI, the ATI logo, AMD Athlon, AMD Opteron, AMD Phenom, AMD Sempron, AMD Turion, FirePro, CrossFire, Radeon, Geode, SeaMicro and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Microsoft, Windows, Xbox360 and Xbox One are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other jurisdictions.
PlayStation is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Wii and Wii U are registered trademarks of Nintendo of America, Inc. Other names are for informational purposes only and are used to identify companies and products and may be trademarks of their respective owners.
On the Investor Relations pages of our Web site, www.amd.com, we post links to our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Ethics for our Executive Officers and all other senior finance executives, our “Worldwide Standards of Business Conduct,” which applies to our Board of Directors and all of our employees, and the charters of the Audit and Finance, Compensation, Nominating and Corporate Governance and Innovation and Technology committees of our Board of Directors.
Our filings with the SEC are posted as soon as reasonably practical after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
You can also obtain copies of these documents by writing to us at: Secretary, AMD, 7171 Southwest Parkway, M/S 100, Austin, Texas 78735, or emailing us at: Corporate.Secretary@amd.com.
All of these documents and filings are available free of charge.
If we make substantive amendments to our Code of Ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller or persons performing similar functions, we intend to disclose the nature of such amendment or waiver on our Web site or in a Current Report on Form 8-K in accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
The information contained on our Web site is not incorporated by reference in, or considered to be a part of, this report.
Semiconductors are components used in a variety of electronic products and systems.
An integrated circuit, or IC, is a semiconductor device that consists of many interconnected transistors on a single chip.
Since the invention of the transistor in 1948, improvements in IC process and design technologies have led to the development of smaller, more complex and more reliable ICs at a lower cost per function.
A microprocessor is an IC that serves as the CPU of a computer.
It generally consists of hundreds of millions of transistors that process data and control other devices in the system, acting as the brain of the computer.
The performance of a microprocessor is a critical factor impacting the performance of a computer and numerous other electronic systems.
The principal elements used to measure CPU performance are work-per-cycle (or how many instructions are executed per cycle), clock speed (representing the rate at which a CPU’s internal logic operates, measured in units of gigahertz, or billions of cycles per second) and power consumption.
Other factors impacting microprocessor performance include the number of cores in a microprocessor, the bit rating of the microprocessor, memory size and data access speed.
Developments in circuit design and manufacturing process technologies have resulted in significant advances in microprocessor performance.
Currently, microprocessors are designed to process 32 bits or 64 bits of information at one time.
The bit rating of a microprocessor generally denotes the largest size of numerical data that a microprocessor can handle.
Microprocessors with 64-bit processing capabilities enable systems to have greater performance by allowing software applications and operating systems to access more memory.
Moreover, as businesses and consumers require greater performance from their computer systems due to the growth of digital data and increasingly sophisticated software applications, semiconductor companies are designing and developing multi-core microprocessors, where multiple processor cores are placed on a single die or in a single processor.
Multi-core microprocessors offer enhanced overall system performance and efficiency because computing tasks can be spread across two or more processing cores each of which can execute a task at full speed.
Multiple processor cores packaged together can increase performance of a computer system without greatly increasing the total amount of power consumed and the total amount of heat emitted.
This type of “symmetrical multiprocessing” is effective in multi-tasking environments where multiple cores can enable operating systems to prioritize and manage tasks from multiple software applications simultaneously and also for “multi-threaded” software applications where multiple cores can process different parts of the software program, or “threads,” simultaneously thereby enhancing performance of the application.
Businesses and consumers also require computer systems with improved power management technology, which allows them to reduce the power consumption of their computer systems thereby reducing the total cost of ownership.
While general purpose computer architectures based on the x86 architecture are sufficient for many customers, we believe that an architecture that optimizes the use of a CPU and GPU for a given workload can provide a substantial improvement in user experience, performance and energy efficiency.
As the volume of digital media increases, we believe end users can benefit from an accelerated computing architecture.
An accelerated computing architecture enables “offloading” of selected tasks, thereby optimizing the use of multiple computational units such as the CPU and GPU, depending on the application or workload.
For example, serial workloads are better suited for CPUs, while highly parallel tasks may be better performed by a GPU.
Our AMD APU combines our CPU and GPU onto a single piece of silicon.
We believe that high performance computing workloads, workloads that are visual in nature and even traditional applications such as photo and video editing or other multi-media applications can benefit from our accelerated computing architecture.
We currently design, develop and sell microprocessor products for desktop PCs, notebooks, tablets, hybrids, servers and embedded products.
Our microprocessors and chipsets are incorporated into computing platforms that also include GPUs and core software to enable and advance the computing components.
A platform is a collection of technologies that are designed to work together to provide a more complete computing solution.
We believe that integrated, balanced platforms consisting of microprocessors, chipsets and GPUs that work together at the system level bring end users improved system stability, increased performance and enhanced power efficiency.
Furthermore, by combining all of these elements onto a single piece of silicon as an APU or an SOC, we believe system performance and power efficiency is further improved.
An SOC is a type of IC with a CPU, GPU and other components, such as a memory controller and peripheral management, comprising a complete computing system on a single chip.
In addition to the enhancements at the end-user level, we believe our customers also benefit from an all-AMD platform, as we are able to provide them with a single point of contact for the key platform components and enable them to bring the platforms to market faster in a variety of client and server system form factors.
Our CPUs and APUs are currently manufactured primarily using 65 nanometer (nm), 45nm, 40nm, 32nm and 28nm process technologies.
We currently base our microprocessors and chipsets on the x86 instruction set architecture and AMD’s Direct Connect Architecture, which connects an on-chip memory controller and input/output, or I/O, channels directly to one or more microprocessor cores.
We typically integrate two or more processor cores onto a single die, and each core has its own dedicated cache, which is memory that is located on the semiconductor die, permitting quicker access to frequently used data and instructions.
Some of our microprocessors have additional levels of cache such as L2, or second-level cache, and L3, or third-level cache, to enable faster data access and higher performance.
Energy efficiency and power consumption continue to be key design principles for our products.
We focus on continually improving power management technology, or “performance-per-watt.” To that end, we offer CPUs, APUs and chipsets with features that we have designed to reduce system-level energy consumption, with multiple low power states which utilize lower clock speeds and voltages that reduce processor power consumption during both active and idle times.
We design our CPUs and APUs to be compatible with operating system software such as the Microsoft® Windows® family of operating systems, Linux®, NetWare®, Solaris and UNIX.
Our AMD family of APUs represents a new approach to processor design and software development, delivering serial, parallel and visual compute capabilities for high definition (HD) video, 3D and data-intensive workloads in the APU.
APUs combine high-performance serial and parallel processing cores with other special-purpose hardware accelerators.
We design our APUs for improved visual computing, security, performance-per-watt and smaller device form factors.
Having the CPU and GPU on the same chip reduces the system power and bill-of- materials, speeds the flow of data between the CPU and GPU through shared memory and allows the GPU to function as both a graphics engine and an application accelerator in highly efficient computing platforms.
Building on the integration of our CPU and GPU onto a single piece of silicon, we are focused on evolving our accelerated computing architecture so that software programmers develop applications to more fully utilize the full serial and parallel compute capabilities of our APUs.
Heterogeneous Systems Architecture (HSA) describes an industry standard that is an overarching design for having combinations of CPU and GPU processor cores operate as a unified engine.
We are a founding member of the HSA Foundation, a non-profit organization established to define and promote this open standards-based approach to heterogeneous computing.
Our microprocessors for server platforms consist of our AMD Opteron™ 6000, 4000, 3000 CPU and X1150/X2150 APU series platform processors.
In addition, to offering microprocessors for servers, we offer dense server systems, designed to reduce power consumption and improve space efficiency for data centers.
Our dense server products include the SeaMicro SM15000™ server, as well as AMD’s SeaMicro Freedom™ Fabric Storage series of storage enclosures.
Our fabric technology, the SeaMicro Freedom™ supercompute fabric, interconnects hundreds of card-sized motherboards and reduces the need for data networking equipment and eliminates hundreds of cables, simplifying data center operations.
We designed this fabric to reduce sever system power consumption while providing lower latency and higher bandwidth interconnections.
In May 2013, we launched our Opteron™ X Series processors, a new family of high density, low power servers.
Also in January 2014, we announced that we would sample AMD Opteron A- Series processor, codenamed “Seattle,” in the first quarter of 2014, our first 64-bit ARM-based server CPU using 28nm process technology.
Typically, our embedded products are used in applications that require high to moderate levels of performance, where key features include low cost, mobility, low power and small form factor.
High performance graphics are increasingly important in many embedded systems.
Customers of our embedded products include vendors in industrial control and automation, digital signage, point of sale/self-service kiosks, medical imaging, set-top box and casino gaming machines as well as enterprise class telecommunications, networking, security, storage systems and thin-clients, or computers that serve as an access device on a network.
The embedded market has moved from developing proprietary, custom designs to leveraging the industry-standard x86 instruction set architecture as a way to reduce costs and speed time to market.
Customer requirements for these systems include very low power for small enclosures and 24x7 operation, support for Linux, Windows and other operating systems and high-performance for increasingly sophisticated applications.
Other requirements include advanced specifications for industrial temperatures, shock, vibration and reliability.
Our embedded platforms include options from the AMD Embedded Geode™ LX family and AMD Opteron Processor family.
In July 2013, we extended our embedded SOC product portfolio with the launch of a new low power AMD G-Series SOC for fanless designs.
A fanless design is one that, instead of using a fan for cooling, relies on other means, such as convection cooling, to transport heat away from certain components.
In August 2013, we launched the AMD Embedded R-Series high performance computing platform for high-end digital gaming and signage.
A chipset is the set of components that manages data flow between a processor or processors, memory and peripherals, such as the keyboard, mouse, monitor, hard drive and CD or DVD drive.
Chipsets perform essential logic functions, and balance the performance of the system and aid in removing bottlenecks.
Chipsets often include graphics, audio, video and other capabilities.
All desktop PCs, notebooks and servers that are not powered by an SOC have a chipset.
In many PCs, the chipset includes a GPU.
A GPU within the chipset solution is commonly known as an integrated graphics processor (IGP), and such a chipset may be called an IGP chipset.
A discrete GPU is usually required in non-APU based systems that do not have an IGP.
By not necessitating a discrete GPU, IGP chipsets can offer a lower cost solution and reduced power consumption and enable smaller system form factors.
With our APU architecture, the GPU is included in the APU.
For systems that are not powered by an SOC, an AMD Controller Hub chip performs the input and output functions of the chipset.
We believe that either the use of an SOC or the combination of an APU and the AMD Controller Hub will eventually replace our market for IGP chipsets.
Our portfolio of chipset products includes chipsets with and without IGPs for desktop PCs and servers, and AMD Controller Hub-based chipsets for our APUs.
We offer AMD M880G and M780G chipsets for notebooks, and we offer AMD 9-Series, 8-Series, 7-Series Discrete and AMD 7-Series Integrated chipsets for desktop PCs.
We also offer AMD 785E, SR5690, 780E and M690T chipsets for our embedded products.
A graphics and visual solution can be in the form of an APU, GPU, IGP, SOC or a combination of a GPU with one of the other foregoing products working in tandem.
The semiconductor graphics market addresses the need for visual or parallel processing in various computing and entertainment platforms such as desktop PCs, notebooks, tablets and workstations.
APUs deliver visual and parallel processing functionality for value and mainstream PCs, while discrete GPUs are specifically architected for higher performance graphics processing.
A dedicated GPU and CPU (whether in an APU or as two separate pieces of silicon) work in tandem to increase overall speed and performance of the system.
Users of these graphics products value a rich visual experience to enable a more compelling and immersive experience.
Moreover, for many consumers, the PC is evolving from a traditional data processing and communications device to an entertainment platform.
Visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key elements of product differentiation among various product platforms.
This has led to the increasing creation and use of processing intensive multimedia content for PCs and to manufacturers designing PCs for playing games, displaying photos and capturing TV and other multimedia content, viewing online videos, photo editing and managing digital content.
In turn, the trend has continued to contribute to the development of higher performance graphics solutions.
For many consumers, the PC is evolving from a traditional data processing and communications device to an entertainment platform.
Visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key elements of product differentiation among various product platforms.
This has led to the increasing creation and use of processing intensive multimedia content for PCs and to manufacturers designing PCs for playing games, displaying photos and capturing TV and other multimedia content, viewing online videos, editing photos and managing digital content.
In turn, the trend has contributed to the development of higher performance graphics solutions.
Heavy computational workloads have traditionally been processed on a CPU, but we believe that the industry is shifting to a new computing paradigm that increasingly relies more on the GPU or a combination of GPU and CPU.
AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing or GPGPU (General Purpose GPU) refers to a set of advanced hardware and software technologies that enable AMD GPUs, working in concert with the computer system’s CPUs, to accelerate applications beyond traditional graphics and video processing by allowing CPUs and GPUs to process information cooperatively.
Heterogeneous computing, which refers to computer systems that use more than one kind of processor, enables PCs and servers to run computationally-intensive tasks more efficiently, which we believe provides a superior application experience to the end user.
Our customers generally use our graphics and visual solutions to increase the speed of rendering images and to improve image resolution and color definition.
We develop our products for use in desktop PCs, notebooks, tablets, professional workstations, servers and gaming consoles.
In addition, our semi-custom products are tailored, high-performance customer-specific solutions based on AMD’s CPU, GPU and APU technology.
We work closely together with our customers to define solutions with a selectable level of GPU performance to precisely match the requirements of the device or application.
Approaches range from complex, full-custom SOCs to more modest adaptations and integrations of existing parts.
With each of our graphics products, we have available drivers and supporting software packages that enable the effective use of these products under a variety of operating systems and applications.
In addition, our recent generation graphics products have Linux® driver support.
semiconductor graphics suppliers work alongside game console manufacturers to enhance the visual experience for users of sophisticated video games.
We leverage our core visual processing technology into the game console market by licensing our graphic technology in game consoles such as the Microsoft® Xbox 360™ and Nintendo Wii and Wii U.
During the first quarter of 2013, Sony announced that it would use a semi- custom APU based on our “Jaguar” central processing unit core and next-generation Radeon graphics in its Sony PlayStation®4 game console system.
During the second quarter of 2013, Microsoft announced that the Xbox One, its next-generation gaming console, would feature an AMD semi-custom SOC product.
The PlayStation®4 and Xbox One were both launched in the fourth quarter of 2013, powered by AMD semi- custom SOC products.
We also provide graphics and visual products for the server market where we leverage our graphics and visual expertise and align our offerings to provide the stability, video quality and bus architectures desired by our customers.
Through our AMD CrossFire™ Pro technology, we enable CAD and DCC professionals to connect two identical AMD FirePro 3D graphics cards with a flex cable connection that can enhance performance of geometry-limited applications.
In February 2013, we launched AMD FirePro™ R5000 remote workstation-class graphics card, designed to power remote 3D-graphics workflows and full computing experiences over IP networks for data center environments.
In March 2013, we launched AMD Radeon Sky series graphic cards designed to enable cloud gaming service companies to stream PC and console- quality gaming experiences to various devices.
We sell our products through our direct sales force and through independent distributors and sales representatives in both domestic and international markets.
Our sales arrangements generally operate on the basis of product forecasts provided by the particular customer, but do not typically include any commitment or requirement for minimum product purchases.
We primarily use purchase orders, sales order acknowledgments and contractual agreements as evidence of our sales arrangements.
Our agreements typically contain standard terms and conditions covering matters such as payment terms, warranties and indemnities for issues specific to our products.
We generally warrant that our products sold to our customers will conform to our approved specifications and be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service for one year.
Subject to certain exceptions, we also offer a three-year limited warranty to end users for only those CPU and AMD A-Series APU products that are commonly referred to as “processors in a box” and for PC workstation products.
We have also offered extended limited warranties to certain customers of “tray” microprocessor products and/or workstation graphics products who have written agreements with us and target their computer systems at the commercial and/or embedded markets.
We market and sell our products under the AMD trademark.
Our desktop PC product brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series, AMD E-Series, AMD FX, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron.
Our notebook and tablet brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series A, AMD E-Series, AMD C-Series, AMD Z-Series, AMD Phenom, AMD Athlon, AMD Turion and AMD Sempron.
Our server brand for microprocessors is AMD Opteron.
We sell dense server systems products under the SeaMicro brand, including the SM15000 series and Freedom Fabric Storage series for storage systems.
We also sell low-power versions of our AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron, as well as AMD Geode, AMD R-Series and G-Series processors as embedded processor solutions.
Our product brand for the consumer graphics market is AMD Radeon.
Our product brand for professional graphics products is AMD FirePro.
We also market and sell our chipsets under the AMD trademark.
We market our products through our direct marketing and co-marketing programs.
In addition, we have cooperative advertising and marketing programs with customers and third parties, including market development programs, pursuant to which we may provide product information, training, marketing materials and funds.
Under our co-marketing development programs, eligible customers can use market development funds as partial reimbursement for advertisements and marketing programs related to our products and third-party systems integrating our products, subject to meeting defined criteria.
Our microprocessor customers consist primarily of original equipment manufacturers, or OEMs, original design manufacturers, or ODMs, system builders and independent distributors in both domestic and international markets.
ODMs provide design and/or manufacturing services to branded and unbranded private label resellers, OEMs and system builders.
Our graphics products customers include the foregoing as well as add-in-board manufacturers, or AIBs.
Customers of our chipset products consist primarily of PC and server OEMs, often through ODMs or other contract manufacturers, who build the OEM motherboards, as well as desktop and server motherboard manufacturers who incorporate chipsets into their channel motherboards.
Our sales and marketing teams work closely with our customers to define product features, performance and timing of new products so that the products we are developing meet our customers’ needs.
We also employ application engineers to assist our customers in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products in order to assist in optimizing product compatibility.
We believe that our commitment to customer service and design support improves our customers’ time-to-market and fosters relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
We work closely with our customers to create differentiated products that leverage our CPU, GPU and APU technology.
Customers pay us non-recurring engineering fees for design and development services and a purchase price for our semi-custom products.
Collectively, our top five customers accounted for approximately 54% of our net revenue during the year ended 2013.
In 2013, Hewlett- Packard Company, Microsoft Corporation and Sony Corporation each accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated net revenues.
Sales to Hewlett-Packard consisted primarily of products from our Computing Solutions segment.
Sales to Microsoft and Sony consisted primarily of products from our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment.
Five customers, including Hewlett-Packard Company, accounted for approximately 58% of the net revenue attributable to our Computing Solutions segment.
In addition, five customers, including Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft and Sony, accounted for approximately 70% of the net revenue attributable to our Graphics and Visual Solutions segment.
A loss of any of these customers could have a material adverse effect on our business.
We focus on three types of OEMs: multi-nationals, selected regional accounts and target market customers.
Large multi-nationals and regional accounts are our core OEM customers.
Our OEM customers include numerous foreign and domestic manufacturers of servers and workstations, desktops, notebooks and PC motherboards.
Typically, distributors handle a wide variety of products, including those that compete with our products.
Distributors typically maintain an inventory of our products.
In most instances, our agreements with distributors protect their inventory of our products against price reductions and provide return rights with respect to any product that we have removed from our price book that is not more than 12 months older than the manufacturing code date.
In addition, some agreements with our distributors may contain standard stock rotation provisions permitting limited levels of product returns.
We strive to establish and broaden our relationships with AIB manufacturers.
We offer component-level graphics and chipset products to AIB manufacturers who in turn build and sell board-level products using our technology to system integrators, or SIs, and to retail buyers.
Our agreements with AIBs protect their inventory of our products against price reductions.
We also sell directly to our SI customers.
SIs typically sell from positions of regional or product-based strength in the market.
They usually operate on short design cycles and can respond quickly with new technologies.
SIs often use discrete graphics solutions as a means to differentiate their products and add value to their customers.
Generally, the IC industry is intensely competitive.
Products typically compete on product quality, power consumption (including battery life), reliability, speed, performance, size (or form factor), cost, selling price, adherence to industry standards (and the creation of open industry standards), software and hardware compatibility and stability, brand recognition, timely product introductions and availability.
Technological advances in the industry result in frequent product introductions, regular price reductions, short product life cycles and increased product capabilities that may result in significant performance improvements.
Our ability to compete depends on our ability to develop, introduce and sell new products or enhanced versions of existing products on a timely basis and at competitive prices, while reducing our costs.
Intel Corporation has dominated the market for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to discipline customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its dominant position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel recently introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top- tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Other competitors include a variety of companies providing or developing ARM-based designs at relatively low cost and low power processors for the computing market including netbooks, tablets and thin-client form factors, as well as dense servers, set-top boxes and gaming consoles.
ARM Holdings designs and licenses its ARM architecture to third parties, including AMD, and offers supporting software and services.
Our ability to compete with companies who use ARM-based solutions depends on our ability to design energy-efficient, high- performing products at an attractive price point.
In the chipset market, our competitors include suppliers of integrated graphics chipsets.
PC manufacturers use integrated chipsets because they cost less than traditional discrete GPUs while offering acceptable graphics performance for most mainstream PC users.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its integrated graphics chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor in this market.
In the graphics and visual solutions market, our competitors include suppliers of discrete graphics, embedded graphics processors and IGPs.
Intel manufactures and sells embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets, and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
The continued improvement of the quality of Intel’s integrated graphics, along with higher unit shipments of our APUs, may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for notebooks, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could take actions that place our discrete GPUs and integrated chipsets at a competitive disadvantage such as giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics and visual solutions market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Other than Intel, our principal competitor in the graphics and visual solutions market is Nvidia.
AMD and Nvidia are the two principal players offering discrete graphics solutions.
Other competitors include a number of smaller companies, which may have greater flexibility to address specific market needs, but less financial resources to do so, especially as we believe that the growing complexity of visual processors and the associated research and development costs represent an increasingly higher barrier to entry in this market.
With respect to our game console products, we compete primarily against Nvidia.
Other competitors include Intel, ARM Holdings and Imagination Technology Group.
We focus our research and development activities on improving and enhancing product design.
One main area of focus is on delivering the next generation of products with greater system level integration of the CPU and GPU and transforming our products into SOCs, with, in each case, improved system performance and performance-per-watt characteristics.
For example, we are focusing on improving the battery life of our microprocessors and APU products for notebooks and tablets and the power efficiency of our microprocessors for servers.
We are also focusing on delivering a range of low-power integrated platforms to serve key markets, including commercial clients, mobile computing and gaming and media computing, as well as developing an HSA, which is designed for software developers to easily program APUs by combining scalar processing on the CPU with parallel processing on the GPU, all while providing high bandwidth access to memory at low power.
We believe that these integrated platforms will bring customers better time-to-market and increased performance and energy efficiency.
We also work with industry leaders on process technology, software and other functional intellectual property and we work with others in the industry, public foundations, universities and industry consortia to conduct early stage research and development.
Our research and development expenses for 2013, 2012 and 2011 were approximately $1.2 billion, $1.4 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively.
For more information, see “Part II, Item 7-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A.
We conduct product and system research and development activities for our products in the United States with additional design and development engineering teams located in China, Canada, India, Singapore, Taiwan and Israel.
Manufacturing Arrangements and Assembly and Test Facilities The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor and APU products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
On April 2, 2011, we entered into a first amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the first amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors and APU products.
The first amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
On March 4, 2012, we entered into a second amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the second amendment was to modify certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products to be delivered by GF to us during 2012.
Under the terms of the second amendment to the WSA, GF granted us rights to contract with another wafer foundry supplier with respect to specified 28nm products for a specified period of time (the limited waiver of exclusivity).
In consideration for the limited waiver of exclusivity, we recorded a charge of $703 million in the first quarter of 2012, consisting of a $425 million cash payment and a $278 million non-cash charge representing the transfer to GF of our remaining investment in GF at fair value.
On December 6, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 made pursuant to the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products, to be delivered by GF to us from the fourth quarter of 2012 through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration for this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
As a result, we recorded a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million for the write-down of inventory to its market value in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee was paid over several quarters, with $80 million paid on December 28, 2012, $40 million paid on April 1, 2013 and $200 million paid on December 31, 2013.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fourth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
GF currently manufactures our microprocessors on 300 millimeter wafers in technologies ranging from 65nm to 28nm.
Smaller process geometries can lead to gains in performance, lower power consumption and lower per unit manufacturing costs.
We continue to have our products manufactured on more advanced process technology because using more advanced process technology can contribute to lower product manufacturing costs and improve a product’s performance and power efficiency.
We own and operate two assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Some wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities are described in the chart set forth below: The remaining wafers for our products are delivered from third-party foundries to our test, assembly and packaging partners located in the Asia-Pacific region who package and test the final semiconductor products.
We rely on contracts and intellectual property rights to protect our products and technologies from unauthorized third-party copying and use.
Intellectual property rights include copyrights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, trade secrets and maskwork rights.
As of December 28, 2013, we had approximately 4,650 patents in the United States and approximately 1,700 patent applications pending in the United States.
In certain cases, we have filed corresponding applications in foreign jurisdictions.
We expect to file future patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions, as we deem appropriate.
We do not believe that any individual patent, or the expiration of any patent, is or would be material to our business.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, we have numerous cross-licensing and technology exchange agreements with other companies under which we both transfer and receive technology and intellectual property rights.
One such agreement is the cross-license agreement that we entered into with Intel on November 11, 2009.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has granted to us and our subsidiaries, and we have granted Intel and its subsidiaries, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all patents that are either owned or controlled by the parties at any time that have a first effective filing date or priority date prior to the five-year anniversary of the effective date of the cross license agreement, referred to as the Capture Period, to make, have made, use, sell, offer to sell, import and otherwise dispose of certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products anywhere in the world.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has rights to make semiconductor products for third parties, but the third-party product designs are not licensed as a result of such manufacture.
We have rights to perform assembly and testing for third parties but not rights to make semiconductor products for third parties.
The term of the cross license agreement continues until the expiration of the last to expire of the licensed patents, unless earlier terminated.
A party can terminate the cross license agreement or the rights and licenses of the other party if the other party materially breaches the cross license agreement and does not correct the noticed material breach within 60 days.
Upon such termination, the terminated party’s license rights terminate but the terminating party’s license rights continue, subject to that party’s continued compliance with the terms of the cross license agreement.
The cross license agreement and the Capture Period will automatically terminate if a party undergoes a change of control (as defined in the cross license agreement), and both parties’ licenses will terminate.
Upon the bankruptcy of a party, that party may assume, but may not assign, the cross license agreement, and in the event that the cross license agreement cannot be assumed, the cross license agreement and the licenses granted will terminate.
Sales are made primarily pursuant to purchase orders for current delivery or agreements covering purchases over a period of time.
Some of these orders or agreements may be revised or canceled without penalty.
Generally, in light of current industry practice, we do not believe that such orders or agreements provide meaningful backlog figures or are necessarily indicative of actual sales for any succeeding period.
Our operating results tend to vary seasonally.
For example, historically, first quarter PC product sales are generally lower than fourth quarter sales.
In addition, with respect to our semi-custom SOC products for game consoles, we expect sales patterns to follow the seasonal trends of a consumer business with sales in the first half of the year being lower than sales in the second half of the year.
As of December 28, 2013, we had approximately 10,671 employees.
Many aspects of our business operations and products are regulated by domestic and international environmental laws and regulations.
These regulations include limitations on discharge of pollutants to air, water, and soil; remediation requirements; product chemical content limitations; manufacturing chemical use and handling restrictions; pollution control requirements; waste minimization considerations; and requirements with respect to treatment, transport, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes.
If we fail to comply with any applicable environmental regulations, we may be subject to fines, suspension of production, alteration of our manufacturing processes, import/export restrictions, sales limitations and/or criminal and civil liabilities.
Existing or future regulations could require us to procure expensive pollution abatement or remediation equipment, to modify product designs or to incur other expenses to comply with environmental regulations.
Any failure to adequately control the use, disposal, storage or discharge of hazardous substances could expose us to future liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on our business.
We believe we are in material compliance with applicable environmental requirements and do not expect those requirements to result in material expenditures in the foreseeable future.
Environmental laws are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time.
For example, the European Union (EU) and China are two among a growing number of jurisdictions that have enacted restrictions on the use of lead and other materials in electronic products.
Other countries have also implemented similar restrictions.
These regulations affect semiconductor devices and packaging.
As regulations restricting materials in electronic products continue to increase around the world, there is a risk that the cost, quality and manufacturing yields of products that are subject to these restrictions, may be less favorable compared to products that are not subject to such restrictions, or that the transition to compliant products may produce sudden changes in demand, which may result in excess inventory.
Recent U.S. legislation requires disclosure and reporting requirements for companies who use “conflict” minerals that originate from the Democratic Republic of Congo or adjoining countries.
We will likely incur additional costs associated with complying with these requirements, such as costs related to determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products, auditing the process and reporting to our customers and the U.S. government.
Also, since our supply chain is complex, we may face reputational challenges if we are unable to sufficiently verify the origins of the subject minerals.
Moreover, we are likely to encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the components of our products are certified as “conflict free” and if we cannot satisfy these customers, they may choose a competitor’s products.
In January 2014, Intel announced that all of its microprocessor products are “conflict free.” Our first “conflict” minerals report covering the 2013 calendar year is due to the SEC by June 2, 2014.
A number of jurisdictions including the EU, Australia and China are developing or have finalized market entry or public procurement regulations for computers and servers based on ENERGY STAR specifications as well as additional energy consumption limits.
There is the potential for certain of our products being excluded from some of these markets which could materially adversely affect us.
While we have budgeted for foreseeable associated expenditures, we cannot assure you that future environmental legal requirements will not become more stringent or costly in the future.
Therefore, we cannot assure you that our costs of complying with current and future environmental and health and safety laws, and our liabilities arising from past and future releases of, or exposure to, hazardous substances will not have a material adverse effect on us.
See also, “Item 3—Legal Proceedings—Environmental Matters,” below.
The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face.
If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
In addition, you should consider the interrelationship and compounding effects of two or more risks occurring simultaneously.
Intel Corporation has dominated the market for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives and to discipline customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs, that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its dominant position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
For example, Intel recently introduced microprocessors for low-cost notebooks, similar to products that we offer for low-cost notebooks.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its integrated graphics chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics and visual solutions market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its introduction of competitive new products, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Our success depends to a significant extent on the development, qualification, implementation and acceptance of new product designs and improvements that provide value to our customers.
Our ability to develop, qualify and distribute, and have manufactured, new products and related technologies to meet evolving industry requirements, at prices acceptable to our customers and on a timely basis are significant factors in determining our competitiveness in our target markets.
For example, form factors have increasingly shifted from desktop PCs and notebooks to tablets, and tablets have been one of the fastest growing form factors.
Historically, a significant portion of our Computing Solutions revenue has been related to desktop PCs.
Currently, a significant portion of our business is focused on the consumer PC portions of the market, and we believe that PC market conditions will remain challenging.
As consumers adopt new form factors and have different requirements than those consumers in the PC market, PC sales could be negatively impacted, which could negatively impact our business.
If we fail to or are delayed in developing, qualifying or shipping new products or technologies that provide value to our customers and address these new trends or if we fail to predict which new form factors consumers will adopt, we may lose competitive positioning, which could cause us to lose market share and require us to discount the selling prices of our products.
Although we make substantial investments in research and development, we cannot be certain that we will be able to develop, obtain or successfully implement new products and technologies on a timely basis.
Delays in developing, qualifying or shipping new products can also cause us to miss our customers’ product design windows or, in some cases, breach contractual obligations or cause us to pay penalties.
If our customers do not include our products in the initial design of their computer systems or products, they will typically not use our products in their systems or products until at least the next design configuration.
The process of being qualified for inclusion in a customer’s system or product can be lengthy and could cause us to further miss a cycle in the demand of end-users, which also could result in a loss of market share and harm our business.
Moreover, market demand requires that products incorporate new features and performance standards on an industry-wide basis.
Over the life of a specific product, the sale price is typically reduced over time.
The introduction of new products and enhancements to existing products is necessary to maintain the overall corporate average selling price.
If we are unable to introduce new products with sufficiently high sale prices or to increase unit sales volumes capable of offsetting the reductions in the sale prices of existing products over time, our business could be materially adversely affected.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements as ofDecember 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2016 and related notes, which are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Part I, Item 1: Business,” “Part II, Item 6: Selected Financial Data” and “Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We are a global semiconductor company primarily offering: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated into an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, discrete graphics processing units (GPUs) and professional graphics; and server and embedded processors, semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products and technology for game consoles.
We also license portions of our intellectual property portfolio.
In this MD&A, we will describe the results of operations and the financial condition for us and our consolidated subsidiaries, including a discussion of our results of operations for 2016 compared to 2015 and 2015 compared to 2014, an analysis of changes in our financial condition and a discussion of our contractual obligations and off balance sheet arrangements.
As we continued to focus on our strategy to improve our business, we made progress towards strengthening our competitive position and improving our financial performance in 2016.
Net revenue for 2016 was $4.3 billion, an increase of 7% compared to 2015 net revenue of $4.0 billion.
The increase in net revenue from 2015 was due to a 9% increase in Computing and Graphics segment revenue and a 5% increase in Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment revenue.
Computing and Graphics segment revenue increased year-over-year primarily due to higher GPU sales, offset by lower microprocessor sales.
Embedded and Semi-Custom segment revenue increased year-over-year primarily due to higher semi-custom SoC sales.
Gross margin, as a percentage of net revenue for 2016, was 23% compared to 27% in 2015.
The decrease in gross margin in 2016 as compared to 2015 was primarily due to a $340 million charge taken in the third quarter of 2016 (the WSA Charge) related to the sixth amendment to the wafer supply agreement (the Sixth Amendment) with GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF).
Operating loss for 2016 was $372 million compared to a $481 million for 2015.
This improvement in operating performance in 2016 compared to 2015 was due to an increase in net revenue described above, a reduction in restructuring and other special charges, net and a licensing gain related to an intellectual property license agreement in connection with the joint ventures in China that we formed with Tianjin Haiguang Advanced Technology Investment Co. Ltd. (THATIC), partially offset by an increase in cost of sales due to the WSA Charge.
During 2016, we continued to closely manage our operating expenses.
Our operating expenses in 2016 decreased to $1.5 billion, compared to $1.6 billion in 2015, due to the absence of restructuring charges in 2016, partially offset by increased R&D expenses.
In 2016, we continued to improve our balance sheet by reducing our debt and extending our debt maturities.
During the third quarter of 2016, we issued $690 million of common stock and $805 million aggregate principal amount of 2.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (2.125% Notes).
We used the net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock and the 2.125% Notes to pay $230 million of our secured revolving line of credit and repurchase an aggregate principal amount of $796 million of our outstanding 6.75% Senior Notes due 2019 (6.75% Notes), 7.75% Senior Notes due 2020 (7.75% Notes), 7.50% Senior Notes due 2022 (7.50% Notes) and 7.00% Senior Notes due 2024 (7.00% Notes).
In the fourth quarter of 2016, we redeemed the remaining $208 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Notes and as a result, we no longer have any 7.75% Notes outstanding.
Total debt as of the end of the fourth quarter of 2016 was $1.4 billion, compared to $2.2 billion at the end of the fourth quarter of 2015.
Our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2016 were $1.3 billion compared to $785 million at December 26, 2015.
During 2016, we continued to execute our roadmap by delivering a number of new products and technologies across our two business segments.
In March 2016, we announced new additions to our desktop processor family, with the AMD A10-7890K APU designed to help enable smooth play of online games and the AMD Athlon X4 880K APU that features our "Excavator" x86 architecture.
Also in March, we introduced the Radeon Pro Duo GPU with the LiquidVR SDK platform designed for many aspects of VR content creation: from entertainment to education, journalism, medicine and cinema.
In May 2016, we introduced our mobile 7th Generation A-Series processors.
Our 7th Generation A-Series processors are designed to provide productivity and entertainment performance with maximum mobility for consumers.
Also in May, we introduced an AMD Multiuser GPU (MxGPU) for blade servers, the AMD FirePro S7100X GPU, designed to provide a “workstation- class” experience for up to 16 users.
We launched our first GPU featuring our Polaris architecture, the Radeon™ RX 480 GPU, in June 2016.
Our Polaris architecture features our latest 4th Gen Graphics Core Next (GCN), along with the latest display technology support and performance per watt capabilities, all based on a FinFET 14 process technology.
In July 2016, we revealed our new Radeon Pro SSG GPU with the ability to expand GPU storage up to 1 terabyte (TB) and which is designed for media and entertainment professionals.
We also announced our new Radeon Pro WX series GPUs, which are based on our Polaris architecture and designed for workstation professionals and creators.
In August 2016, we introduced the new Radeon RX 470, targeted at high definition (HD) resolutions for gamers.
Also in August 2016, we released the new Radeon RX 460 graphics card with an ultra-quiet cooling solution and sub-75W power footprint for mainstream and e-sports gaming.
We announced two new AMD Embedded Radeon graphics cards, the AMD Embedded Radeon E9260 and the AMD Embedded Radeon E9550 discrete GPU products in September 2016.
These GPUs bring our Polaris architecture to the embedded markets and are designed to elevate the level of GPU processing performance available to embedded customers.
In October 2016, we announced the first PCs featuring 7th Generation AMD PRO APUs.
These APUs are built for businesses and designed to deliver increased computing and graphics performance and improved energy efficiency.
In connection with our plans to further sharpen our focus and operations on designing high-performance products, we entered into a definitive agreement to form two joint ventures with Tongfu Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd. (formerly, Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd.) (TFME) in the third quarter of 2015.
In April 2016, we completed the sale of a majority of the equity interests in Suzhou TF AMD Semiconductor Co., Ltd. (formerly, AMD Technologies (China) Co., Ltd.) and TF AMD Microelectronics (Penang) Sdn.
), to affiliates of TFME to form two joint ventures (collectively, ATMP JV).
As a result of the sale, TFME’s affiliates own 85% of the equity interests in the ATMP JV while certain of our subsidiaries own the remaining 15%.
We received approximately $342 million, including purchase price adjustments, in net cash proceeds for selling 85% of the equity interest in the ATMP JV.
In February 2016, as part of our IP monetization strategy, we and THATIC formed a joint venture comprised of two separate legal entities, China JV1 and China JV2 (collectively, the THATIC JV).
Our equity share in China JV1 and China JV2 is a majority and minority interest, respectively, funded by our contribution of certain of our patents.
The THATIC JV’s primary purpose is to support our expansion into the server product market in China.
We also licensed certain of our intellectual property (Licensed IP) to the THATIC JV for a total of approximately $293 million in license fees payable over several years contingent upon achievement of certain milestones.
We also expect to receive a royalty based on the sales of the THATIC JV’s products to be developed on the basis of such Licensed IP.
We will also provide certain engineering and technical support to the THATIC JV in connection with the product development.
In addition, we entered into a Sixth Amendment with GF during the third quarter of 2016.
The Sixth Amendment modifies certain terms of the wafer supply agreement applicable to wafers for our microprocessor, graphics processor and semi-custom products for a five-year period from January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2020.
Also, in connection with and in consideration for the limited waiver and rights under the Sixth Amendment, we entered into a warrant agreement (the Warrant Agreement) with West Coast Hitech L.P. (WCH), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mubadala Development Company PJSC (Mubadala) pursuant to which WCH received the right to purchase up to 75 million shares of our common stock.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from period to period, the primary factors that resulted in those changes, and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
On March 2, 2009, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement among us, Mubadala Technology Investments LLC, or Mubadala Tech, (formerly, Advanced Technology Investment Company LLC) and West Coast Hitech L.P. (WCH), pursuant to which we formed GF.
In connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement, AMD, Mubadala Tech and GF entered into a Wafer Supply Agreement (the WSA), a Funding Agreement (the Funding Agreement) and a Shareholders’ Agreement (the Shareholders’ Agreement) on March 2, 2009.
On March 4, 2012, as partial consideration for certain rights received under a second amendment to the WSA, we transferred to GF all of the remaining capital stock of GF that we owned.
In addition, as of March 4, 2012, the Funding Agreement was terminated, and we were no longer party to the Shareholders’ Agreement.
As a result of these transactions, we no longer owned any GF capital stock as of March 4, 2012.
GF continues to be a related party of us because Mubadala Development Company PJSC (Mubadala) and Mubadala Tech are affiliated with WCH, our largest stockholder.
WCH and Mubadala Tech are wholly-owned subsidiaries of Mubadala.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements, and a certain portion of our GPU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
If we acquire a third-party business that manufactures microprocessor and APU products, we will have up to two years to transition the manufacture of such microprocessor and APU products to GF.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor and APU products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
On August 30, 2016, we entered into a sixth amendment (the Sixth Amendment) to the WSA.
The Sixth Amendment modifies certain terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor, graphics processor and semi-custom products for a five-year period from January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2020.
AMD and GF agreed to establish a comprehensive framework for technology collaboration for the 7nm technology node.
The Sixth Amendment also provides us a limited waiver with rights to contract with another wafer foundry with respect to certain products in the 14nm and 7nm technology nodes and gives us greater flexibility in sourcing foundry services across our product portfolio.
In consideration for these rights, we agreed to pay GF $100 million in installments starting in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2016 through the third fiscal quarter of 2017.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we paid GF $25 million.
Starting in 2017 and continuing through 2020, we also agreed to make quarterly payments to GF based on the volume of certain wafers purchased from another wafer foundry.
Further, for each calendar year during the term of the Sixth Amendment, AMD and GF agreed to annual wafer purchase targets that increase from 2016 through 2020.
If we do not meet the annual wafer purchase target for any calendar year, we will be required to pay to GF a portion of the difference between our actual wafer purchases and the wafer purchase target for that year.
The annual targets were established based on our current business and market expectations and take into account the limited waiver we have received for certain products.
AMD and GF also agreed on fixed pricing for wafers purchased during 2016 and established a framework to agree on annual wafer pricing for the years 2017 to Our total purchases from GF related to wafer manufacturing and research and development activities were approximately$0.7 billion for 2016, $0.9 billion for Warrant Agreement.
Also on August 30, 2016, in consideration of the limited waiver and rights under the Sixth Amendment, we entered into a warrant agreement (the Warrant Agreement) with WCH, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mubadala.
Under the Warrant Agreement, WCH and its permitted assigns are entitled to purchase 75 million shares of our common stock (the Warrant Shares) at a purchase price of $5.98 per share.
The warrant under the Warrant Agreement is exercisable in whole or in part until February 29, 2020, provided that the maximum number of Warrant Shares that may be exercised prior to the one-year anniversary of the Warrant Agreement shall not exceed 50 million.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Warrant Agreement will only be exercisable to the extent that Mubadala does not beneficially own, either directly through any other entities directly and indirectly owned by Mubadala or its subsidiaries, an aggregate of more than 19.99% of our outstanding capital stock after any such exercise.
During 2016, we recorded a charge of $340 million, consisting of the $100 million payment under the Sixth Amendment and the $240 million value of the warrant under the Warrant Agreement issued in consideration of the Sixth Amendment.
On April 29, 2016, we and certain of our subsidiaries completed the sale of a majority of the equity interests in Suzhou TF-AMD Semiconductor Co., Ltd. (formerly, AMD Technologies (China) Co., Ltd.), and TF AMD Microelectronics (Penang) Sdn.
), to affiliates of Tongfu Microelectronics Co., Ltd. (formerly, Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics Co., Ltd.) (TFME), a Chinese joint stock company, to form two joint ventures (collectively, the ATMP JV).
As a result of the sale, TFME’s affiliates own 85% of the equity interests in the ATMP JV while certain of our subsidiaries own the remaining 15%.
We have no obligations to fund the ATMP JV.
As a result of the transaction, we received approximately$342 million, including purchase price adjustments, in net cash proceeds for selling 85% of the equity interest in each of Suzhou TF-AMD Semiconductor Co., Ltd. and TF AMD Microelectronics (Penang) Sdn.
These proceeds, net of certain transaction costs, were included in investing activities on our consolidated statements of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2016.
We recognized a net pre-tax gain on the sale of the 85% equity interest in ATMP JV of$146 million for the year ended December 31, 2016, which was recognized in Other income (expense), net on our consolidated statements of operations.
The net pre-tax gain reflects the excess of the sum of net cash proceeds and fair value of our retained 15% equity interests in the ATMP JV over the sum of the net book values of our former subsidiaries and other closing costs directly attributed to the divestiture.
The above gain includes $11 million in excess of fair value of our retained interest over the corresponding net book values.
In determining the fair value of our retained 15% equity interests in the ATMP JV, we used quoted prices from comparable bids for this transaction.
We also considered other factors including the control premium and the amount of consideration received for the portion sold.
We account for our equity interests in the ATMP JV under the equity method of accounting due to our significant influence over the ATMP JV.
As of December 31, 2016, the carrying value of our investment in the ATMP JV was approximately$59 million.
Following the deconsolidation, the ATMP JV is our related party.
The ATMP JV provides assembly, test, mark and packaging (ATMP) services to us.
We currently pay the ATMP JV for ATMP services on a cost-plus basis.
Our total purchases from the ATMP JV during the year ended December 31, 2016 amounted to approximately $265 million.
Our payable to the ATMP JV, as ofDecember 31, 2016, was $128 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2016, we recorded a $10 million loss in Equity in income (loss) of ATMP JV on our consolidated statements of operations, which included certain expenses incurred by us on behalf of the ATMP JV.
In February 2016, we and THATIC, a third-party Chinese entity (JV Partner), formed a joint venture comprised of two separate legal entities, China JV1 and China JV2 (collectively, the THATIC JV).
Our equity share in China JV1 and China JV2 is a majority and minority interest, respectively, funded by our contribution of certain of our patents.
The JV Partner is responsible for the initial and on-going financing of the THATIC JV’s operations.
We have no obligations to fund the THATIC JV.
The THATIC JV’s primary purpose is to support our expansion into the server and workstation product market in China.
We licensed certain of our intellectual property (Licensed IP) to the THATIC JV for a total of approximately $293 million in license fees payable over several years contingent upon achievement of certain milestones.
We also expect to receive a royalty based on the sales of the THATIC JV’s products to be developed on the basis of such Licensed IP.
We will also provide certain engineering and technical support to the THATIC JV in connection with the product development.
We concluded the China JV1 and China JV2 are not operating joint ventures and are variable interest entities due to their reliance on on-going financing by JV Partner.
We determined that we are not the primary beneficiary of either China JV1 or China JV2, as we do not have unilateral power to direct selling and marketing activities, manufacturing and product development activities related to the THATIC JV's products.
Accordingly we will not consolidate either of these entities and therefore account for our investments in the THATIC JV under the equity method of accounting.
THATIC JV is our related party.
Income related to the Licensed IP will be recognized over the period commencing upon delivery of the first Licensed IP milestone through the date of the milestone that requires our continuing involvement in the product development process.
Royalty payments will be recognized in income once earned.
We will classify Licensed IP income and royalty income as other operating income.
During the year ended December 31, 2016, we recognized $88 million of licensing gain associated with the THATIC JV as part of operating income.
Our total exposure to losses through our investment in the THATIC JV is limited to our investments in the THATIC JV, which was zero as ofDecember 31, 2016.
Our share in the net losses of the THATIC JV for the year ended December 31, 2016 was not material and is not recorded in our consolidated statement of operations since we are not obligated to fund the THATIC JV's losses in excess of our investment in the THATIC JV.
As of December 31, 2016, the total assets and liabilities of the THATIC JV were not material.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP).
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to our revenue, inventories, goodwill impairments and income taxes.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Although actual results have historically been reasonably consistent with management’s expectations, the actual results may differ from these estimates or our estimates may be affected by different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
We record a provision for estimated sales returns and allowances on product sales for estimated future price reductions and other customer incentives in the same period that the related revenues are recorded.
We base these estimates on actual historical sales returns, historical allowances, historical price reductions, market activity and other known or anticipated trends and factors.
These estimates are subject to management’s judgment and actual provisions could be different from our estimates and current provisions, resulting in future adjustments to our revenue and operating results.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence based on projected sales outlook.
This evaluation includes analysis of historical sales levels by product and projections of future demand.
These projections assist us in determining the carrying value of our inventory.
In addition, we write off inventories that we consider obsolete.
We adjust the remaining specific inventory balances to approximate the lower of our standard manufacturing cost or market value.
Among other factors, management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining obsolescence and market value.
If, in any period, we anticipate future demand or market conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of sales in the period the revision is made.
This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period.
If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written down in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales, resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment present.
We perform an annual goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each year.
In assessing impairment on goodwill, we first analyze qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
The qualitative factors we assess include long-term prospects of our performance, share price trends, market capitalization and Company-specific events.
If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, we do not need to perform the two-step impairment test.
If based on that assessment, we believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a two-step goodwill impairment test will be performed.
The first step measures for impairment by applying fair value-based tests at the reporting unit level.
We evaluate whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level by first determining whether the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value and, if so, by determining whether the implied fair value of goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value.
The implied fair value of a reporting unit is determined through the application of one or more valuation models common to our industry, including the income, market and cost approaches.
While market valuation data for comparable companies is gathered and analyzed, we believe that there has not been sufficient comparability between the peer groups and the specific reporting units to allow for the derivation of reliable indications of value using a market approach.
Therefore, we have ultimately employed the income approach which requires estimates of present value of estimated future cash flows.
Cash flow projections are based on management’s estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market condition.
The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit’s ability to execute on the projected cash flows.
A variance in the discount rate could have a significant impact on the amount of the goodwill impairment charge recorded, if any.
The second step (if necessary) measures the amount of impairment by applying fair value-based tests to the individual assets and liabilities within each reporting unit.
Based on the results of our annual qualitative analysis of goodwill in 2016, we determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount and, as such, we did not need to perform the two-step impairment test and there was no goodwill impairment.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2015, each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value, indicating that there was no goodwill impairment.
Based on the results of our annual goodwill impairment analysis in 2014, we determined that the carrying value of the Computing and Graphics reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value and accordingly an impairment charge of $233 million was recorded, which represented the entire goodwill balance within this reporting unit.
The remaining two reporting units’ estimated fair values exceeded their carrying value, ranging from approximately 156% to approximately 209%.
In estimating the fair value of our reporting units, we took into consideration the challenging industry and market trends that existed as of September 28, 2014, the date of the annual goodwill impairment test for each respective reporting unit.
Estimates of fair value for all of our reporting units can be affected by a variety of external and internal factors.
Potential events or circumstances that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the key assumptions we used in estimating the fair value of our reporting units include adverse changes in our industry, increased competition, an inability to successfully introduce new products in the marketplace or to achieve internal forecasts, and a decline in our stock price.
If the estimated fair value of our reporting units declines due to any of these factors, we may be required to record future goodwill impairment.
In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for tax and financial statement reporting purposes.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets.
If recovery is not likely, we must increase our charge to income tax expense, in the form of a valuation allowance, for the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
We consider past performance, future expected taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance.
In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the Internal Revenue Service or other taxing authority.
If our estimates of these taxes are greater or less than actual results, an additional tax benefit or charge will result.
We recognize the interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as interest expense and income tax expense, respectively.
Management, including the Chief Operating Decision Maker, who is our Chief Executive Officer, reviews and assesses our operating performance using segment net revenue and operating income (loss) before interest, other income (expense), net, income taxes and equity in income (loss) of ATMP JV.
These performance measures include the allocation of expenses to the operating segments based on management’s judgment.
We have the following two reportable segments: the Computing and Graphics segment, which primarily includes desktop and notebook processors and chipsets, discrete GPUs and professional graphics; and the Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment, which primarily includes server and embedded processors, semi-custom SoC products, development services, technology for game consoles and licensing portions of our intellectual property portfolio.
In addition to these reportable segments, we have an All Other category, which is not a reportable segment.
This category primarily includes certain expenses and credits that are not allocated to any of the reportable segments because management does not consider these expenses and credits in evaluating the performance of the reportable segments.
Included in this category are employee stock-based compensation expense, the charge related to the Sixth Amendment to the WSA with GF, restructuring and other special charges, net, amortization of acquired intangible assets, workforce rebalancing severance charges, goodwill impairment charge and significant or unusual lower of cost or market inventory adjustments.
We also reported the results of former businesses in the All Other category because the operating results were not material.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, the primary factors that resulted in those changes and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in December.
The years endedDecember 31, 2016, December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 included 53 weeks, 52 weeks and 52 weeks, respectively.
The extra week in 2016 did not have a material impact on our results of operations.
References in this report to 2016, 2015 and 2014 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The following table provides a summary of net revenue and operating income (loss) by segment and income (loss) before income taxes and equity in income (loss) Computing and Graphics net revenue of $2.0 billion in 2016 increased by 9% compared to $1.8 billion in 2015 as a result of a 9% increase in unit shipments, partially offset by a 2% decrease in average selling price.
The increase in unit shipments was primarily attributable to higher unit shipments of our GPU products, partially offset by lower unit shipments of our microprocessor products.
The increase of unit shipments of our GPU products was primarily driven by demand for our Polaris architecture-based GPU products.
The decrease in unit shipments of our microprocessor products was primarily due to lower unit shipments of our desktop microprocessor products due to lower demand, partially offset by higher shipments of notebook microprocessor products driven by higher demand for our 7th Generation A-Series notebook processors.
The decrease in average selling price was primarily attributable to a decrease in average selling price of our desktop microprocessor and notebook GPU products due to a shift in our product mix, partially offset by an increase in average selling price of our channel GPU products primarily due to strong demand for our Polaris architecture-based GPU products.
Computing and Graphics net revenue of $1.8 billion in 2015 decreased by 42% compared to $3.1 billion in 2014 as a result of a 44% decrease in unit shipments, partially offset by a 3% increase in average selling price.
Unit shipments of all our Computing and Graphics products decreased.
The decrease in unit shipments of all categories of products was due to lower demand caused by challenging global macro-economic conditions, especially in the Greater China region, in addition to increased competitive pressures and reduced demand from our OEM customers in advance of the Microsoft Windows® 10 operating system.
The increase in average selling price was primarily attributable to an increase in average selling price of our notebook GPU products and channel GPU products due to a shift in our product mix, partially offset by a decrease in average selling price of our notebook microprocessor products and chipset products.
Computing and Graphics operating loss was$238 million in 2016 compared to an operating loss of$502 million in 2015.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above and a decrease in operating expenses, partially offset by an increase in cost of sales primarily due to higher sales in 2016 compared to 2015.
In 2015, cost of sales included an inventory write-down of $52 million as a result of lower than anticipated demand for primarily older- generation APU products.
Operating expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Computing and Graphics operating loss was $502 million in 2015 compared to an operating loss of $76 million in 2014.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $696 million decrease in cost of sales and a decrease in operating expenses.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments in 2015 compared to 2014, partially offset by an inventory write-down of $52 million as a result of lower anticipated demand for primarily older-generation APU products.
Operating loss in 2014 included a $19 million benefit from technology licensing revenue.
Operating expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom net revenue of $2.3 billion in 2016 increased by 5% compared to net revenue of $2.2 billion in 2015.
The increase in net revenue was primarily due to an increase in unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products and non-recurring engineering (NRE) revenue.
The increase in unit shipments was primarily driven by increased demand.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom net revenue of $2.2 billion in 2015 decreased by 8% compared to net revenue of $2.4 billion in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net revenue received in connection with lower unit shipments of our server and embedded products due primarily to increased competitive pressures, as well as a decrease in net revenue from certain royalty arrangements and a decrease in NRE revenue.
The decrease in net revenue was partially offset by an increase in net revenue received in connection with higher unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom operating income was $283 million in 2016 compared to $215 million in 2015.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, an $88 million licensing gain recorded in 2016 related to the Licensed IP to the THATIC JV, and a decrease in cost of sales, in part due to the absence of a technology node transition charge of $33 million recorded in 2015, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses.
Operating expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom operating income was $215 million in 2015 compared to $399 million in 2014.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses and a decrease in cost of sales.
The decrease in cost of sales was primarily due to a decrease in unit shipments of our server and embedded products in 2015 compared to 2014, largely offset by a technology node transition charge of $33 million and an inventory write-down of $13 million.
Operating expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
All Other operating loss of $417 million in 2016 included a charge of $340 million, which was comprised of the $100 million payment under the Sixth Amendment and the $240 million value of the warrant under the Warrant Agreement, and stock-based compensation expense of $86 million, partially offset by restructuring reversals of $10 million.
All Other operating loss of $194 million in 2015 included restructuring and other special charges, net of $129 million and stock-based compensation expense of $63 million.
Restructuring and other special charges, net of $129 million included $76 million related to our decision to exit from the dense server systems business, $37 million related to our 2015 Restructuring Plan and $16 million related to our 2014 Restructuring Plan.
All Other operating loss of $478 million in 2014 included a goodwill impairment charge of $233 million, stock-based compensation expense of $81 million, restructuring and other special charges, net of $71 million, lower of cost or market inventory adjustment of $58 million, workforce rebalancing severance charges of $14 million, amortization of acquired intangible assets of $14 million and other expenses of $7 million.
The following is a summary of certain consolidated statement of operations data for2016, 2015 and 2014.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was23% in 2016 compared to 27% in 2015.
Gross margin in 2016 was adversely impacted by a charge of $340 million, which is comprised of a $100 million payment under the Sixth Amendment and the value of the warrant of $240 million under the Warrant Agreement.
The impact of the charge accounted for eight gross margin percentage points.
Gross margin in 2015 was adversely impacted by an inventory write-down of $65 million, which was primarily the result of lower anticipated demand for older-generation APUs and a technology node transition charge of $33 million.
The impact of the inventory write-down and the technology node transition charge accounted for approximately two gross margin percentage points.
In the absence of these charges, the gross margin would have increased by two percentage points, primarily driven by improved product mix.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 27% in 2015 compared to 33% in 2014.
Gross margin in 2015 was adversely impacted by an inventory write- down of $65 million, which was primarily the result of lower anticipated demand for older-generation APUs and a technology node transition charge of $33 million.
The impact of the write-down and the technology node transition charge accounted for approximately two gross margin percentage points.
Gross margin in 2015 was also adversely impacted by a lower proportion of revenue from the Computing and Graphics segment due to lower sales which has a higher average gross margin than our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and also by lower game console royalties.
Gross margin in 2014 included a $58 million lower of cost or market inventory adjustment, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point, and a $27 million benefit from technology licensing revenue, which accounted for less than one gross margin percentage point.
Research and development expenses of $1.0 billion in 2016 increased by $61 million, or 6%, compared to $0.9 billion in 2015.
The increase was primarily due to a $138 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $13 million increase attributable to our All Other category, partially offset by a $90 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment increased primarily due to a $128 million increase in product engineering and design costs.
Research and development expenses attributable to our All Other category increased primarily due to a $13 million increase in stock-based compensation expense.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $108 million decrease in product engineering and design costs.
Research and development expenses of $947 million in 2015 decreased by $125 million, or 12%, compared to $1.1 billion in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to a $120 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment and a $21 million decrease in the All Other category primarily related to a $9 million workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in 2014 and an $8 million decrease in stock-based compensation expenses.
The decrease was partially offset by a $16 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $116 million decrease in product engineering and design costs and a $4 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment increased primarily due to a $17 million increase in product engineering and design costs.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $460 million in 2016 decreased by $22 million, or 5%, compared to $482 million in 2015.
The decrease was primarily due to a $40 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment primarily due to an $18 million decrease in sales and marketing activities and a $22 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $6 million increase in other general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $12 million increase attributable to our All Other category primarily due to an $11 million increase in stock-based compensation expense.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $482 million in 2015 decreased by $122 million, or 20%, compared to $604 million in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to an $84 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment, a $19 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $19 million decrease in the All Other category primarily related to a $5 million workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in 2014 and a $10 million decrease in stock-based compensation expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $62 million decrease in sales and marketing expenses and a $22 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment decreased primarily due to a $5 million decrease in sales and marketing expenses and a $14 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
As of December 26, 2015, the Italian tax authorities had concluded their audit of our subsidiaries’ activities in Italy for the years 2003 through 2013.
We entered into a settlement for $11 million in taxes and penalties, which was reflected in full in the 2015 tax provision and $2 million in interest.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $0 million in 2016, $3 million in 2015 and $14 million in 2014.
The decrease from 2014 to 2015 was due to the impairment of intangible assets as a result of our exit from the dense server systems business in the first quarter of 2015.
The related intangible assets were fully amortized as of December 26, 2015.
In the third quarter of 2015, we implemented a restructuring plan (2015 Restructuring Plan) focused on our ongoing efforts to simplify our business and better align resources around our priorities and business outlook.
The 2015 Restructuring Plan involved a reduction of global headcount by approximately 5% and included organizational actions such as outsourcing certain IT services and application development.
During 2015, we recorded a $37 million restructuring charge, which consisted of $27 million for severance and benefit costs, $1 million for facilities-related costs and $9 million for intangible asset-related charges.
The actions associated with the 2015 Restructuring Plan will be completed by the end of the first quarter of 2017.
The following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities during2016 and the related liabilities recorded in Other current liabilities and Other long- term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2016: In the fourth quarter of 2014, we implemented a restructuring plan (2014 Restructuring Plan) designed to improve operating efficiencies.
The 2014 Restructuring Plan involved a reduction of global headcount by approximately 6% and an alignment of our real estate footprint with our reduced headcount.
We recorded a$57 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter of 2014, which consisted of$44 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, $6 million for contract or program termination costs, $1 million for facilities-related costs and $6 million for asset impairments, a non-cash charge.
During 2015, we recorded a $16 million restructuring charge, which consisted of $5 million non-cash charge related to asset impairments, $2 million for severance and related benefits and $9 million for facilities-related costs.
The 2014 Restructuring Plan was completed during the third quarter of 2015.
The following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities during2016 and the related liabilities recorded in “Other current liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2016: As a part of our strategy to simplify and sharpen our investment focus, we exited the dense server systems business, formerly SeaMicro, in the first quarter of 2015.
As a result, we recorded a charge of $76 million in “Restructuring and other special charges, net” on our consolidated statements of operations during 2015.
This charge consisted of an impairment charge of $62 million related to the acquired intangible assets.
We concluded that the carrying value of the acquired intangible assets associated with our dense server systems business was fully impaired as we did not have plans to utilize the related freedom fabric technology in any of our future products nor did we have any plans at that time to monetize the associated intellectual property.
In addition, the exit charge consisted of a $7 million non-cash charge related to asset impairments, $4 million of severance and related benefits and $3 million for contract or program termination costs.
We substantially completed this exit activity during the second quarter of 2016.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, we recorded other special charges of $13 million.
The amount primarily included $10 million due to the departure of our former CEO, of which $5 million was related to cash and $5 million was related to stock-based compensation expense.
The amount is recorded under “Restructuring and other special charges, net” on the consolidated statements of operations.
Interest expense of $156 million in 2016 decreased by $4 million compared to $160 million in 2015, primarily due to the repurchases of debt bearing higher interest rates and issuance of new debt at a lower interest rate in late 2016.
Interest expense of $160 million in 2015 decreased by $17 million compared to $177 million in 2014, primarily due to timing of issuances of new debt and repurchases of other debt in 2014.
In 2016, we recognized $80 million of other income, net, primarily due to the net gain on sale of equity interests in the ATMP JV of $146 million, partially offset by the $68 million total loss on debt repurchases.
In 2015, we recognized $5 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
In 2014, we recognized $66 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a $61 million loss from debt repurchases and a $7 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, partially offset by $3 million of interest income.
We recorded an income tax provision of$39 million, $14 million and $5 million in 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
The income tax provision in 2016 was primarily due to $41 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations including $27 million attributable to gain on the sale of 85% of the ownership interest in the subsidiary operating a factory in Suzhou and $9 million of withholding taxes on cross-border transactions where no foreign tax credit is expected to be available, offset by $2 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
The income tax provision in 2015 was primarily due to $16 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations, offset by $2 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
The income tax provision in 2014 was primarily due to $7 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations, offset by $2 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
As of December 31, 2016, substantially all of our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, continued to be subject to a valuation allowance.
The realization of these assets is dependent on substantial future taxable income which, at December 31, 2016, in management’s estimate, is not more likely than not to be achieved.
As of December 26, 2015, the Italian tax authorities had concluded their audit of our subsidiaries’ activities in Italy for the years 2003 through 2013.
We entered into a settlement for $11 million in taxes and penalties, which was reflected in full in the 2015 tax provision, and $2 million in interest.
We allocated stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options and restricted stock units for the years endedDecember 31, 2016, December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 in our consolidated statements of operations as follows: Total stock-based compensation expense, net of tax of $0 During 2016, 2015 and 2014, we did not realize any excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation and therefore we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows.
Stock-based compensation expense of $86 million in 2016 increased by $23 million as compared to $63 million in 2015.
The increase was primarily due to a higher weighted average grant date fair value and higher number of shares related to restricted stock units granted in 2016, compared to the restricted stock units granted in 2013, which became fully amortized in 2016.
The increase was also driven by performance-based restricted stock units with market conditions granted in 2015 and 2016.
Stock-based compensation expense of $63 million in 2015 decreased by $18 million as compared to $81 million in 2014.
The decrease was primarily due to a lower weighted average grant date fair value and the effect of the 2015 and 2014 Restructuring Plans.
The increase in international sales as a percentage of net revenue in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily driven by a higher proportion of revenue from international sales of our semi-custom SoC products.
The decrease in international sales as a percentage of net revenue in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily driven by a decrease in sales in China.
We expect that international sales will continue to be a significant portion of total sales in the foreseeable future.
Substantially all of our sales transactions were denominated in U.S. dollars.
As of December 31, 2016, our cash and cash equivalents consisted of cash, government money market funds and commercial paper.
Our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2016 were $1.3 billion compared to $785 million as of December 26, 2015.
The increase during the year was due to net cash provided by our operating, investing and financing activities discussed below.
The percentage of cash and cash equivalents held domestically was 98% as of December 31, 2016, and 88% as of December 26, 2015.
Our cash flows for fiscal 2016, 2015 and 2014 were as follows: Net cash provided by (used in): Our debt obligations of $1.4 billion net of unamortized debt discount of $308 million associated with the 2.125% Notes as ofDecember 31, 2016 decreased compared to $2.2 billion as of December 26, 2015.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents balance along with our Secured Revolving Line of Credit will be sufficient to fund operations, including capital expenditures, over the next 12 months.
We believe that in the event we decide to obtain external funding, we may be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives.
Should we require additional funding, such as to meet payment obligations of our long-term debt when due, we may need to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities, which may be issued from time to time under an effective registration statement, through the issuance of securities in a transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
Uncertain global economic conditions have in the past adversely impacted, and may in the future adversely impact, our business.
If market conditions deteriorate, we may be limited in our ability to access the capital markets to meet liquidity needs on favorable terms or at all, which could adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition, including our ability to refinance maturing liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $90 million in 2016 compared to net cash used in operating activities of$226 million in 2015.
The improvement in cash flows from operating activities was primarily due to lower operating expenses, including lower labor costs and lower restructuring-related payments, receipt of $97 million associated with the licensing agreement with THATIC JV and higher sales and timing of related collections, partially offset by timing of accounts payable payments.
Net cash used in operating activities was $226 million in 2015 compared to $98 million in 2014.
The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to lower cash collections during 2015 compared 2014 driven by lower sales compared to 2014, partially offset by lower other operating expenses and labor cost as a result of restructuring actions and the absence of the final $200 million cash payment made in the first quarter of 2014 related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $267 million in 2016, which consisted of a net cash inflow of $342 million from sale of equity interests in the ATMP JV, partially offset by a cash outflow of $77 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $147 million in 2015, which consisted of a net cash inflow of $235 million from purchases, sales and maturities of available for sale securities, partially offset by a net cash outflow of $88 million for purchases and sales of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $12 million in 2014, which consisted of a cash outflow of $95 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment, offset by a net cash inflow of $83 million from purchases, sales and maturities of available for sale securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $122 million in 2016, primarily due to the $782 million net proceeds from the issuance of our 2.125% Notes, the $667 million net proceeds from selling 115 million shares of our common stock and the $20 million proceeds from issuance of common stock under stock-based compensation equity plans, partially offset by the repurchases of an aggregate principal amount of $1.1 billion of our outstanding 6.75% Notes, 7.75% Notes, 7.50% Notes and 7.00% Notes for $1.1 billion in cash and repayments in aggregate of $230 million of our Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59 million in 2015, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $100 million, of which $42 million was used to repay the remaining aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2015 (6.00% Notes) during the second quarter of 2015.
In addition, during 2015, we received $5 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $46 million in 2014, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our 6.75% Notes of $589 million, our 7.00% Notes of $491 million and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $75 million, partially offset by $518 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 6.00% Notes, $522 million in payments to repurchase our 8.125% Senior Notes due 2017 (8.125% Notes), $48 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 7.75% Notes, $24 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 7.50% Notes and $3 million in payments for capital lease obligations.
During 2014, we also received $4 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
During 2016, 2015 and 2014, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows for these periods.
The following table summarizes our consolidated principal contractual cash obligations, as ofDecember 31, 2016, and is supplemented by the discussion following the table: (1) Represents estimated aggregate interest obligations for our outstanding debt obligations that are payable in cash, excluding non-cash amortization of debt issuance costs.
(2) We have purchase obligations for goods and services where payments are based, in part, on the volume or type of services we acquire.
In those cases, we only included the minimum volume of purchase obligations in the table above.
Purchase orders for goods and services that are cancelable upon notice and without significant penalties are not included in the amounts above.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements as of December 27, 2014 and December 28, 2013 and for each of the three years in the period ended December 27, 2014 and related notes, which are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Part I, Item 1: Business,” “Part II, Item 6: Selected Financial Data” and “Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We are a global semiconductor company with facilities worldwide.
Within the global semiconductor industry, we offer primarily: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an accelerated processing unit (APU), chipsets, discrete graphics processing units (GPUs) and professional graphics; and server and embedded processors, dense servers, semi-custom System-on-Chip (SoC) products and technology for game consoles.
In this MD&A, we will describe the results of operations and the financial condition for us and our consolidated subsidiaries, including a discussion of our results of operations for 2014 compared to 2013 and 2013 compared to 2012, an analysis of changes in our financial condition and a discussion of our contractual obligations and off balance sheet arrangements.
Net revenue for 2014 was $5.5 billion, an increase of 4% compared to 2013 net revenue of $5.3 billion.
The increase in net revenue from 2013 was due to a 51% increase in Embedded, Enterprise and Semi-Custom segment revenue, primarily due to higher semi-custom SoC sales.
The annual increase in Embedded, Enterprise and Semi-Custom segment net revenue was offset by a 16% decrease in Computing and Graphics segment net revenue.
The annual decrease in the Computing and Graphics segment was primarily due to lower desktop processor and chipset sales.
While we believe the pace of the decline in the PC market is slowing, our annual Computing and Graphics segment results reflect the ongoing challenges of a competitive consumer PC market.
During 2014, as part of our strategy to transform our business to attain approximately 50% of our revenue from high-growth adjacent markets by the end of 2015, we continued to focus on introducing a more diverse product portfolio.
By the end of 2014, we derived approximately 40% of our annual revenues from high-growth markets.
In the second quarter of 2014, we announced our ambidextrous computing roadmap to develop custom high-performance ARM and x86 processor cores for 2016.
At the same time, we publicly demonstrated the AMD Opteron™ A1100 Series, our first 64-bit ARM-based server processor based on 28 nanometer (nm) technology.
During 2014, we continued to experience strong demand for our AMD semi-custom SoCs that are found in Sony PlayStation®4 and Microsoft Xbox One.
We also launched a number of new embedded products during 2014, including the second-generation AMD Embedded R-series APU and CPU, the new x86 AMD Embedded G-Series SoC, the AMD Embedded G-Series CPU and the AMD Embedded Radeon™ E8860 GPU.
We also continued to develop and introduce differentiated products in 2014.
We expanded our notebook APU offerings in 2014 with the introduction of the AMD 2014 Performance Mobile APU designed for ultrathin and high-performance mobile PCs, the AMD Pro A-Series APU for commercial PCs and the third-generation AMD mainstream and low-powered mobile APU designed for commercial and consumer mobile devices.
We also launched a number of graphics products in 2014, including the AMD Radeon™ R9 295X2 and AMD Radeon™ R9 285 designed for performance gaming.
In 2014, we made progress in improving our balance sheet by re-profiling our debt maturity schedule.
During 2014, we repurchased $487 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2015 (6.00% Notes), reducing the outstanding aggregate principal amount to $42 million.
We repurchased $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 8.125% Senior Notes due 2017 (8.125% Notes).
We also repurchased $50 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Senior Notes due 2020 (7.75% Notes) in open market transactions, and $25 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Senior Notes due 2022 (7.50% Notes).
The repurchases of the 7.75% Notes and 7.50% Notes were funded with our Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
To assist us in financing these note repurchases, during 2014, we issued $500 million of 7.00% Senior Notes due 2024 (7.00% Notes) and $600 million of 6.75% Senior Notes due 2019 (6.75% Notes).
Total debt as of the end December 27, 2014 was $2.2 billion compared to $2.1 billion as of December 28, 2013.
Our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 27, 2014 were $1.0 billion compared to $1.2 billion as of December 28, 2013.
On March 2, 2009, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement among us, Advanced Technology Investment Company LLC (currently known as Mubadala Technology Investments LLC (Mubadala Tech)) and West Coast Hitech (WCH), pursuant to which we formed GF.
In connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement, AMD, Mubadala Tech and GF entered into a Wafer Supply Agreement (the WSA), a Funding Agreement (the Funding Agreement) and a Shareholders’ Agreement (the Shareholders’ Agreement) on March 2, 2009.
At GF’s formation on March 2, 2009 and through December 26, 2009, GF was deemed a variable-interest entity, and we were deemed to be GF’s primary beneficiary.
Accordingly, we consolidated GF under applicable accounting rules.
As a result of certain GF governance changes, we deconsolidated GF and accounted for our GF ownership under the equity method of accounting as of December 27, 2009.
Following the deconsolidation, GF became our related party.
In the first quarter of 2011, as a result of a contribution to GF by an affiliate of Mubadala Tech and certain GF governance changes noted above, our ownership in GF was diluted, and we concluded that we no longer had the ability to exercise significant influence over GF.
Accordingly, we changed our accounting for our investment in GF from the equity method to the cost method of accounting and recognized a dilution gain in investee of approximately $492 million.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we identified indicators of impairment in GF that were deemed other than temporary.
We performed a valuation analysis and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $209 million.
The carrying value of our remaining investment in GF after the impairment charge was $278 million as of December 31, 2011.
On March 4, 2012, as partial consideration for certain rights received under a second amendment to the WSA, we transferred to GF all of the remaining capital stock of GF that we owned.
In addition, as of March 4, 2012, the Funding Agreement was terminated, and we were no longer party to the Shareholders’ Agreement.
As a result of these transactions, we no longer owned any GF capital stock as of March 4, 2012.
GF continues to be a related party of us because Mubadala Development Company PJSC (Mubadala) and Mubadala Tech are affiliated with WCH, our largest stockholder.
WCH and Mubadala Tech are wholly-owned subsidiaries of Mubadala.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
If we acquire a third-party business that manufactures microprocessor and APU products, we will have up to two years to transition the manufacture of such microprocessor and APU products to GF.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor and APU products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
On April 2, 2011, we entered into a first amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the first amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors and APU products.
The first amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
On March 4, 2012, we entered into a second amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the second amendment was to modify certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products, to be delivered by GF to us during 2012.
Under the terms of the second amendment to the WSA, GF granted us rights to contract with another wafer foundry supplier with respect to specified 28nm products for a specified period of time (the limited waiver of exclusivity).
In consideration for the limited waiver of exclusivity, we recorded a charge of $703 million in the first quarter of 2012 consisting of a $425 million cash payment and a $278 million non-cash charge representing the transfer to GF of our remaining investment in GF at fair value.
On December 6, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 made pursuant to the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products, to be delivered by GF to us from the fourth quarter of 2012 through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration for this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
As a result, we recorded a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million for the write-down of inventory to its market value in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee was paid over several quarters, with $80 million paid on December 28, 2012, $40 million paid on April 1, 2013 and $200 million paid on December 31, 2013.
On March 30, 2014, we entered into a fourth amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the fourth amendment was to establish volume purchase commitments and fixed pricing for the 2014 calendar year as well as to modify certain other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for some of our microprocessor, graphics processor and semi-custom game console products to be delivered by GF to us during the 2014 calendar year.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fifth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
Our total purchases from GF related to wafer manufacturing and research and development activities for 2014, 2013 and 2012 were $1.0 billion, $1.0 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to our revenue, inventories, goodwill impairments and income taxes.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Although actual results have historically been reasonably consistent with management’s expectations, the actual results may differ from these estimates or our estimates may be affected by different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
We record a provision for estimated sales returns and allowances on product sales for estimated future price reductions and other customer incentives in the same period that the related revenues are recorded.
We base these estimates on actual historical sales returns, historical allowances, historical price reductions, market activity and other known or anticipated trends and factors.
These estimates are subject to management’s judgment and actual provisions could be different from our estimates and current provisions, resulting in future adjustments to our revenue and operating results.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence based on projected sales outlook.
This evaluation includes analysis of historical sales levels by product and projections of future demand.
These projections assist us in determining the carrying value of our inventory.
In addition, we write off inventories that we consider obsolete.
We adjust the remaining specific inventory balances to approximate the lower of our standard manufacturing cost or market value.
Among other factors, management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining obsolescence and market value.
If, in any period, we anticipate future demand or market conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of sales in the period the revision is made.
This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period.
If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written down in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales, resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment present.
We perform an annual goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each year.
We evaluate whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level by first determining whether the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value and, if so, by determining whether the implied fair value of goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value.
The implied fair value of a reporting unit is determined through the application of one or more valuation models common to our industry, including the income, market and cost approaches.
While market valuation data for comparable companies is gathered and analyzed, we believe that there has not been sufficient comparability between the peer groups and the specific reporting units to allow for the derivation of reliable indications of value using a market approach.
Therefore, we have ultimately employed the income approach which requires estimates of present value of estimated future cash flows.
Cash flow projections are based on management’s estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market condition.
The key assumptions we have used to determine the fair value of our reporting units includes projected cash flows for the next 10 years and discount rates ranging from 13% to 19% from 2012 to 2014.
The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit’s ability to execute on the projected cash flows.
A variance in the discount rate could have a significant impact on the amount of the goodwill impairment charge recorded, if any.
Estimating the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions.
These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions and the determination of appropriate comparable publicly-traded companies.
In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to individual reporting units to determine the carrying amount of each reporting unit.
For the annual goodwill impairment analysis in 2014, we determined that the carrying value of the Computing and Graphics reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value and accordingly an impairment charge of $233 million was recorded, which represented the entire goodwill balance within this reporting unit.
The remaining two reporting units’ estimated fair values exceeded their carrying value, ranging from approximately 156% to approximately 209%.
In estimating the fair value of our reporting units, we took into consideration the challenging industry and market trends that existed as of September 28, 2014, the date of the annual goodwill impairment test for each respective reporting unit.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2013 and 2012, each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value, indicating that there was no goodwill impairment.
Estimates of fair value for all or our reporting units can be affected by a variety of external and internal factors.
Potential events or circumstance that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the key assumptions we used in estimating the fair value of our reporting units include adverse changes in our industry, increased competition, an inability to successfully introduce new products in the marketplace or to achieve internal forecasts, and a decline in our stock price.
If the estimated fair value of our reporting units declines due to any of these factors, we may be required to record future goodwill impairment.
In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for tax and financial statement reporting purposes.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets.
If recovery is not likely, we must increase our charge to income tax expense, in the form of a valuation allowance, for the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
We consider past performance, future expected taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance.
In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the Internal Revenue Service or other taxing authority.
If our estimates of these taxes are greater or less than actual results, an additional tax benefit or charge will result.
We recognize the interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as interest expense and income tax expense, respectively.
Management, including the Chief Operating Decision Maker, who is our Chief Executive Officer, reviews and assesses our operating performance using segment net revenue and operating income (loss) before interest, other income (expense), net, and income taxes.
These performance measures include the allocation of expenses to the operating segments based on management’s judgment.
In connection with our continued strategic transformation, effective July 1, 2014, we realigned our organizational structure.
As a result of this organizational change, we have the following two reportable segments: the Computing and Graphics segment, which primarily includes desktop and notebook processors and chipsets, discrete GPUs and professional graphics; and the Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment, which primarily includes server and embedded processors, dense servers, semi- custom SoC products, engineering services and royalties.
Effective October 8, 2014, Dr. Lisa T. Su became our Chief Executive Officer, succeeding Rory P. Read.
This management change did not result in a change in our reportable segments or to the fact that the Chief Operating Decision Maker is our Chief Executive Officer.
In addition to these reportable segments, we have an All Other category, which is not a reportable segment.
This category primarily includes certain expenses and credits that are not allocated to any of the reportable segments because management does not consider these expenses and credits in evaluating the performance of the reportable segments.
Also included in this category are amortization of acquired intangible assets, employee stock-based compensation expense, net restructuring and other special charges, workforce rebalancing severance charges, goodwill impairment charge, significant or unusual lower of cost or market inventory adjustments, loss on debt repurchases, a charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF and a net gain from licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters.
We also reported the results of former businesses in the All Other category because the operating results were not material.
In addition, during 2014, we reclassified $273 million of lower of cost or market inventory adjustment previously recorded in Computing and Graphics segment in 2012 to All Other category to conform with the current year’s presentation.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, the primary factors that resulted in those changes and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in December.
The years ended December 27, 2014, December 28, 2013 and December 29, 2012 each included 52 weeks.
References in this report to 2014, 2013 and 2012 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The following table provides a summary of net revenue and operating income (loss) by segment and income (loss) before income taxes for 2014, 2013 and 2012.
The prior period results have been recast to reflect our new reportable segments.
Computing and Graphics net revenue of $3.1 billion in 2014 decreased by 16% compared to $3.7 billion in 2013 as a result of a 27% decrease in unit shipments, partially offset by a 15% increase in average selling price.
The decrease in unit shipments was primarily attributable to lower unit shipments of our microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs and chipsets due to challenging consumer PC market conditions and our chipsets being integrated into our APU products.
The increase in average selling price was primarily attributable to an increase in average selling price of our microprocessor products due to improved product mix of our microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs.
Computing and Graphics net revenue of $3.7 billion in 2013 decreased by 21% compared to $4.7 billion in 2012 as a result of a 23% decrease in unit shipments and a 2% increase in average selling price.
The decrease in unit shipments was primarily attributable to lower unit shipments of our microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs, chipset products and GPU products.
The increase in average selling price was primarily attributable to an increase in average selling price of our GPU products, partially offset by a decrease in average selling price of our microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs and chipset products.
Unit shipments and average selling price for microprocessor products for desktop and notebook PCs and chipset products decreased primarily due to challenging market conditions and the increasing popularity of tablets as a consumer device of choice, which resulted in decreased demand for our products.
Computing and Graphics operating loss was $76 million in 2014 compared to an operating loss of $101 million in 2013.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to a $323 million decrease in cost of sales, a $201 million decrease in research and development expenses and a $89 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by the decrease in net revenue referenced above.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments in 2014 compared to 2013.
Operating loss in 2014 included a $19 million benefit from technology licensing revenue.
In addition, operating loss in 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of inventory that had been previously reserved in the third quarter of 2012, as compared to a similar $8 million benefit in 2014.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Computing and Graphics operating loss was $101 million in 2013 compared to an operating income of $129 million in 2012.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $582 million decrease in cost of sales, a $154 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses and a $37 million decrease in research and development expenses.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments in 2013 compared to 2012 as well as the absence of the inventory write-down of approximately $100 million during the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A-Series APU products, codenamed “Llano”.
In addition, operating loss for 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of inventory that had been previously reserved in the third quarter of 2012.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom net revenue of $2.4 billion in 2014 increased by 51% compared to net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2013.
The increase was primarily due to an increase in net revenue received in connection with higher unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products, which we began shipping in the second quarter of 2013.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2013 increased by 126% compared to net revenue of $0.7 billion in 2012.
The increase was primarily due to net revenue received in connection with sales of our semi-custom SoC products, which we began shipping in the second quarter of 2013, partially offset by a decrease in net revenue from server products.
Net revenue from sales of server products decreased in 2013 compared to 2012 due to lower unit shipments, as well as lower average selling price due to challenging market conditions, which adversely impacted demand.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom operating income was $399 million in 2014 compared to $295 million in 2013.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $614 million increase in cost of sales, a $64 million increase in research and development expenses and a $15 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to an increase in unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products in 2014 compared to 2013.
In addition, operating income in 2014 included an $8 million benefit from technology license revenue.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom operating income was $295 million in 2013 compared to $18 million in 2012.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $702 million increase in cost of sales and a $12 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $112 million decrease in research and development expenses.
The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to the commencement of unit shipments of our semi-custom SoC products in the second quarter of 2013.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses increased and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
All Other revenue pertains to results from former businesses, which were immaterial in 2014, 2013 and 2012.
All Other operating loss of $478 million in 2014 included a goodwill impairment charge of $233 million, stock-based compensation expense of $81 million, net restructuring and other special charges of $71 million, lower of cost or market inventory adjustment of $58 million, $14 million related to workforce rebalancing severance charges, $14 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and $7 million related to other expenses.
All Other operating loss of $91 million in 2013 included stock-based compensation expense of $91 million, net restructuring and other special charges of $30 million and $18 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets.
During the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlements regarding patent-related matters, for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash, which we recorded as an offset to operating expenses.
All Other operating loss of $1.2 billion in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, lower of cost or market inventory adjustment of $273 million related to the fee for GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations, $100 million of net restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense of $97 million, $14 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and $6 million related to our acquisition of SeaMicro, Inc. (SeaMicro) in 2012.
The following is a summary of certain consolidated statement of operations data for 2014, 2013 and 2012.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 33% in 2014 compared to 37% in 2013.
Gross margin in 2014 included a $58 million lower of cost or market inventory adjustment, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point, and a $27 million benefit from technology licensing revenue, which accounted for less than one gross margin percentage point.
Gross margin in 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of inventory that was previously reserved in the third quarter of 2012, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point as compared to $8 million in 2014 which had a less than one percentage point impact.
Gross margin in 2014 was adversely impacted by lower average gross margins in our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment driven by increased sales of lower margin semi-custom SoC products.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 37% in 2013 compared to 23% in 2012.
Gross margin in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, a lower of cost or market charge of $273 million and a $5 million charge recorded to cost of sales related to a legal settlement.
Absent the effect of these charges, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 41% in 2012 compared to 37% in 2013.
Gross margin in 2013 was adversely impacted by the lower average gross margins in our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment primarily driven by lower margin semi-custom SoC products, which we began shipping in the second quarter of 2013.
Gross margin in 2012 was adversely impacted by an inventory write-down of $100 million during the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A- Series APU products, codenamed “Llano,” which accounted for two gross margin percentage points.
Gross margin in 2013 included a $57 million benefit from sales of this previously reserved inventory, which accounted for one gross margin percentage point.
Research and development expenses of $1.1 billion in 2014 decreased by $129 million, or 11%, compared to $1.2 billion in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to a $201 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment, partially offset by a $64 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi- Custom segment and a $9 million increase in the All Other category related to a workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in the first quarter of 2014.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $171 million decrease in product engineering and design costs, a $22 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expenses and a $10 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment, where we expect to continue to increase our investment, increased primarily due to a $59 million increase in product engineering and design costs and a $3 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
Research and development expenses of $1.2 billion in 2013 decreased by $153 million, or 11%, compared to $1.4 billion in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a $112 million decrease in research and development expense attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment, a $37 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment and a $4 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense recorded in the All Other category.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment decreased as a result of a $103 million decrease in product engineering costs and a $9 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses.
The decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment was primarily due to a $38 million decrease in product engineering costs and a $35 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses, partially offset by a $34 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $604 million in 2014 decreased by $70 million, or 10%, compared to $674 million in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to an $89 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment, partially offset by a $15 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment and a $5 million increase in the All Other category related to a workforce rebalancing severance charge recorded in the first quarter of 2014.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $61 million decrease in sales and marketing activities and a $25 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi- Custom segment increased primarily due to an $8 million increase in sales and marketing activities and a $5 million increase in other general and administrative expenses.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $674 million in 2013 decreased by $149 million, or 18%, compared to $823 million in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a $154 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment and a $6 million decrease in the All Other category due to the absence of SeaMicro acquisition-related costs recorded in 2012, partially offset by a $12 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom segment.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing and Graphics segment decreased primarily due to a $93 million decrease in sales and marketing activities and a $72 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $10 million increase in other employee compensation and benefit expense.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Enterprise, Embedded and Semi-Custom Solutions segment increased primarily due to a $33 million increase in other general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $20 million decrease in sales and marketing activities.
During the fourth quarter of 2013, we entered into licenses and settlement agreements regarding patent-related matters for which we received in aggregate $48 million in net cash, which we recorded as an offset to operating expenses.
At the time we entered into the agreements, we did not have any future obligations that we were required to perform in order to earn the settlement payments.
Accordingly, we recognized the entire settlement amount in our operating results for the fourth quarter of 2013.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $14 million in 2014, $18 million in 2013 and $14 million in 2012.
The decrease from 2013 to 2014 was due to the reduced amortization base amount of acquired intangible assets of ATI.
The increase from 2012 to 2013 was due to amortization of the intangible assets of SeaMicro, which we acquired in 2012.
In October 2014, we implemented a restructuring plan designed to improve operating efficiencies.
The plan involved a reduction of global headcount by approximately 6%, largely completed by the end of 2014, and an alignment of our real estate footprint with the reduced headcount, largely expected to be completed by the end of first half of 2015.
We recorded a $57 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter of 2014, which consisted of $44 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, $6 million for contract or program termination costs, $1 million for facilities related costs and $6 million for asset impairments, a non-cash charge.
In accordance with the restructuring plan, we expect to record a restructuring charge of approximately $13 million in 2015, primarily related to real estate actions.
We made cash payments of $19 million in the fourth quarter of 2014 and expect to make cash payments of $34 million and $8 million in 2015 and 2016, respectively.
In the fourth quarter of 2012, we implemented a restructuring plan designed to improve our cost structure and to strengthen our competitiveness in core growth areas.
The plan primarily involved a workforce reduction of approximately 14% as well as asset impairments and facility consolidations.
We recorded restructuring expense in the fourth quarter of 2012 of approximately $90 million, which was primarily comprised of employee severance.
The non-cash portion of the restructuring expense included approximately $4 million of asset impairments.
In 2014 and 2013, we incurred costs of $3 million and $11 million, respectively, related to facility consolidation and site closures, which were partially offset by the release of estimated employee-related severance costs of $5 million and $2 million, respectively.
The 2012 restructuring plan was largely completed as of the end of the third quarter of 2013.
In 2012, we recorded an approximately $8 million for severance and costs related to certain employee benefits.
The 2011 restructuring plan was completed as of the end of the first quarter of 2012.
The following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities during 2014 and 2013 and the remaining related liabilities recorded in “Accrued and other current liabilities” and “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 27, 2014: The following table provides a summary of each major type of cost associated with the 2014, 2012 and 2011 restructuring plans for the periods presented: In September 2013, we sold a light industrial building in Singapore and leased back a portion of the original space.
We received net cash proceeds of $46 million in connection with the sale, which resulted in a $17 million gain that we recorded in the third quarter of 2013 and a deferred gain of $14 million (as of September 28, 2013) that is being amortized over the initial operating lease term.
The initial operating lease term expires in September 2023 and provides for options to extend the operating lease for 4 years at the end of the initial lease term and for an additional 3.5 years thereafter.
In September 2013, we also sold an office building in Austin, Texas.
We received net cash proceeds of $10 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $5 million gain in the third quarter of 2013.
In March 2013, we sold and leased back certain land and office buildings in Austin, Texas.
We received net cash proceeds of $164 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $52 million charge in the first quarter of 2013.
The operating lease expires in March 2025 and provides for one 10-year optional renewal.
In March 2013, we also sold an office building in Markham, Ontario, Canada and leased back a portion of the original space through June 2013.
We received net cash proceeds of $13 million in connection with the sale and recorded a $6 million gain in the first quarter of 2013.
The net charge of $24 million recognized in 2013 related to the real estate transactions described above is recorded in the “Restructuring and other special charges, net” line item on the consolidated statements of operations.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, we recorded other special charges of $13 million.
The amount primarily included $10 million due to the departure of our former CEO, of which $5 million was related to cash and $5 million was related to stock-based compensation expenses.
The amount is recorded as “Restructuring and other special charges, net” on the consolidated statements of operations.
Interest income was $3 million in 2014 compared to $5 million in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in average investments in marketable securities and a decrease in the weighted-average interest rate during 2014.
Interest income was $5 million in 2013 compared to $8 million in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in average investments in marketable securities during 2013.
Interest expense of $177 million in 2014 was relatively flat as compared to $177 million in 2013 and $175 million in 2012.
Other expense, net, in 2014 was $69 million compared to $5 million of other expense, net, in 2013 and $6 million of other income, net, in In 2014, we recognized $69 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a $61 million loss from debt repurchases and a $7 million loss In 2013, we recognized $5 million of other expense, net, primarily due to a $2 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and a $2 million realized loss on sale of our auction rate securities (ARS) investments.
In 2012, we recognized $6 million of other income, net, primarily due to other income recorded in the third quarter of 2012, partially offset by a $5 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and a $4 million other-than-temporary impairment charge related to one of our ARS investments.
We recorded an income tax provision of $5 million and $9 million in 2014 and 2013, respectively, and an income tax benefit of $34 million in 2012.
The income tax provision in 2014 was primarily due to $7 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations, offset by $2 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain US tax credits.
The income tax provision in 2013 was primarily due to $9 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations and $3 million related to the reversal of previously recognized tax benefits associated with other comprehensive income, offset by $3 million of tax benefits for Canadian tax credits and the monetization of certain U.S. tax credits.
The income tax benefit in 2012 was primarily due to a tax benefit of $36 million relating to our SeaMicro acquisition, a $1 million tax benefit for the tax effects of items credited directly to other comprehensive income, a $2 million tax benefit for Canadian tax credits and a $9 million tax benefit associated with the successful negotiation of a tax holiday in a foreign jurisdiction net of $14 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations.
As of December 27, 2014, substantially all of our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, continued to be subject to a valuation allowance.
The realization of these assets is dependent on substantial future taxable income which, at December 27, 2014, in management’s estimate, is not more likely than not to be achieved.
Stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units for the years ended December 27, 2014, December 28, 2013 and December 29, 2012 was allocated in our consolidated statements of operations as follows: Total stock-based compensation expense, net of tax of $0 During 2014, 2013 and 2012, we did not realize any excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation and therefore we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows.
Stock-based compensation expense of $81 million in 2014 decreased by $10 million as compared to $91 million in 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to lower expense related to stock options and restricted stock granted in connection with our SeaMicro acquisition as most were becoming fully vested during 2014 and lower stock compensation expense as a result of our 2014 restructuring plan.
Stock-based compensation expenses of $91 million in 2013 decreased $6 million compared to $97 million in 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to a lower weighted average grant date fair value and lower stock compensation expense as a result of our 2012 restructuring plan, partially offset by the additional expense related to stock options and restricted stock granted in connection with our SeaMicro acquisition.
As of December 27, 2014, we had $16 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to stock options that will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.08 years.
Also, as of December 27, 2014, we had $98 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to restricted stock and restricted stock units including performance- based restricted stock units that will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.75 years.
International sales as a percentage of net revenue were 81% in 2014, 85% in 2013 and 92% in 2012.
The decrease in international sales as a percentage of net revenue in 2014 compared 2013 and 2012 was primarily driven by an increase in net revenue from domestic sales of our semi-custom SoC products.
We expect that international sales will continue to be a significant portion of total sales in the foreseeable future.
Substantially all of our sales transactions were denominated in U.S. dollars.
As of December 27, 2014, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1.0 billion were lower compared to $1.2 billion as of December 28, 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to the final $200 million cash payment made in the first quarter of 2014 related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 and the timing of sales and related collections.
During 2014, we also used $95 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Also, during 2014, we reclassified $45 million of our marketable securities that were previously classified as long-term to short-term as those were intended to be used for operations in the next twelve months.
The percentage of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held domestically was 89% as of December 27, 2014.
Our debt and capital lease obligations as of December 27, 2014 were $2.2 billion as compared to $2.1 billion as of December 28, 2013.
During 2014, we issued $600 million of 6.75% Notes, $500 million of 7.00% Notes, and received $75 million net proceeds from our Secured Revolving Line of Credit borrowings.
During 2014, we repurchased and redeemed $500 million in aggregate principal amount of our 8.125% Notes for $531 million in cash.
As of the end of December 27, 2014, we did not have any 8.125% Notes outstanding.
Also in 2014, we repurchased $487 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes for $529 million in cash, $50 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Notes for $48 million in cash, and $25 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Notes for $24 million in cash.
The repurchases of the 7.75% Notes and 7.50% Notes were funded with our Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, we announced a restructuring plan to implement operating efficiencies.
We believe our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance along with the savings from our restructuring plan and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit will be sufficient to fund operations, including capital expenditures, over the next twelve months.
We believe that in the event we decide to obtain external funding, we may be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives.
Over the longer term, should additional funding be required, such as to meet payment obligations of our long-term debt when due, we may need to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities, which may be issued from time to time under an effective registration statement, through the issuance of securities in a transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
Uncertain global economic conditions have in the past and may in the future adversely impact our business.
If market conditions deteriorate, we may be limited in our ability to access the capital markets to meet liquidity needs on favorable terms or at all, which could adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition, including our ability to refinance maturing liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $98 million in 2014.
A net loss of $403 million in 2014 was primarily adjusted for $233 million of goodwill impairment charge, $203 million of depreciation and amortization expenses, $81 million of stock-based compensation expenses, $61 million net loss on debt redemptions, $17 million of non-cash interest expenses primarily related to amortization of debt discounts on our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes, amortization of debt issuance costs and a software and technology license and $14 million non-cash net restructuring and other special charges.
The net changes in operating assets as of December 27, 2014 compared to December 28, 2013 included a decrease in inventories of $199 million, largely driven by the lower of cost or market inventory adjustment and lower levels of inventory for our Computing and Graphics and semi-custom SoC products, a decrease in accounts receivable of $7 million, which was primarily due to timing of sales and collections, an increase in prepayments to GF of $113 million and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $7 million.
Accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other decreased by $231 million in 2014 as compared to 2013, primarily due to a $104 million decrease in accounts payable driven by timing of purchases and payments, a $73 million decrease in deferred income on shipments to our distributor customers and a $47 million decrease in accrued compensation and benefits.
During 2014, our payables to GF, which included all amounts we owe to GF, decreased by $146 million as compared to 2013.
The decrease was primarily due to the final $200 million payment to GF made in the first quarter of 2014 related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable to GF due to timing of payments.
Net cash used in operating activities was $148 million in 2013.
A net loss of $83 million in 2013 was primarily adjusted for $236 million of depreciation and amortization expenses, $91 million of stock-based compensation expenses, $31 million net loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment and $25 million of non-cash interest expenses primarily related to amortization of debt discounts on our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes and amortization of debt issuance costs.
The net changes in operating assets as of December 28, 2013 compared to December 29, 2012 included an increase in inventories of $322 million, largely driven by an increase in Computing and Graphics inventory as well as semi- custom SoC products due to our customers’ next generation game console ramps, an increase in accounts receivable of $200 million, which was primarily due to higher sales during the fourth quarter of 2013 compared to the fourth quarter of 2012, an increase in other assets of $92 million, primarily due to new software licenses and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $11 million.
Accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities increased by $266 million in 2013 as compared to 2012, primarily due to a $241 million increase in accounts payable driven by larger purchases of inventory to support higher sales during the fourth quarter of 2013 compared to the fourth quarter of 2012, a $36 million increase in deferred income on shipments to our distributor customers, and a $28 million increase in accrued compensation and benefits, partially offset by a $39 million decrease in other liabilities, primarily due to a decrease in restructuring accruals and payments for technology licenses.
During 2013, our payables to GF, which included all amounts we owe to GF, decreased by $89 million as compared to 2012.
The decrease was primarily due to payments of $175 million related to GF’s limited waiver of exclusivity and $40 million related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations for wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012, partially offset by an increase of $126 million of payables related to wafer purchases.
Net cash used in operating activities was $338 million in 2012.
A net loss of $1.2 billion in 2012 was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of a $278 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, $260 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $97 million of stock-based compensation expense and $23 million of non-cash interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes.
These charges were partially offset by a benefit of $40 million for deferred income taxes.
The net changes in operating assets as of December 29, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 included a decrease in accounts receivable of $290 million and an increase in inventories of $83 million, which were primarily due to lower sales during 2012.
During 2012, our payable to GF, which included all amounts that we owe to GF, increased by $277 million as compared to 2011.
The increase was due to cash obligations of $240 million related to the third amendment to the WSA and $175 million related to the limited waiver of exclusivity, partially offset by a decrease of $138 million in the amount of billings related to wafer purchases.
Accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other decreased by $232 million in 2012 as compared to 2011, primarily due to a $94 million decrease in accrued liabilities, a $92 million decrease in accounts payable and other current liabilities, a $23 million decrease in other liabilities, a $15 million decrease in deferred income on shipments to distributors and a $6 million decrease in accrued compensation and benefits.
Net cash used in investing activities was $12 million in 2014, which consisted of a cash outflow of $95 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment, offset by a net cash inflow of $83 million from purchases, sales and maturities of available for sale securities.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $455 million in 2013 and primarily consisted of net proceeds of $301 million from the purchase, sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities and net proceeds of $154 million from sales and purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $19 million in 2012.
We had a net cash inflow of $404 million in 2012 from purchases, sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities, partially offset by a net cash outflow of $281 million related to our SeaMicro acquisition, a cash outflow of $133 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment and a cash outflow of $9 million related to other investing activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $46 million in 2014, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our 6.75% Notes of $589 million, our 7.00% Notes of $491 million and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $75 million, partially offset by $518 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 6.00% Notes, $522 million in payments to repurchase our 8.125% Notes, $48 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 7.75% Notes, $24 million in payments to repurchase a portion of our 7.50% Notes and $3 million in payments for capital lease obligations.
During 2014, we also received $8 million in net proceeds, primarily from U.S. government grants for research and development activities and $4 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $13 million in 2013, primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings pursuant to our Secured Revolving Line of Credit of $55 million, net proceeds from U.S. government grants for research and development activities and foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products of $11 million and $3 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan, partially offset by the repurchase of $50 million in principal amount of our 6.00% Notes (which is a portion of our outstanding 6.00% Notes) in open market transactions and $5 million in payments for capital lease obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $37 million in 2012, primarily due to net proceeds from the issuance of our 7.50% Notes of $491 million, $23 million from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities and $14 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan, partially offset by our repayment of outstanding principal and accrued interest on our 5.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2012 and repayment of capital lease obligations of $489 million.
During 2014, 2013 and 2012, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any effects relating to financing cash flows for these periods.
The following table summarizes our consolidated principal contractual cash obligations, as of December 27, 2014, and is supplemented by the discussion following the table: Represents estimated aggregate interest obligations for our outstanding debt obligations that are payable in cash, excluding capital lease obligations.
Also excludes non-cash amortization of debt discounts on our 6.00% Notes and amortization of debt issuance costs.
We have purchase obligations for goods and services where payments are based, in part, on the volume or type of services we acquire.
In those cases, we only included the minimum volume of purchase obligations in the table above.
Purchase orders for goods and services that are cancelable upon notice and without significant penalties are not included in the amounts above.
In addition we have obligations for software technology and licenses where payments are fixed and non-cancelable which are also included in the table above.
Represents our payment obligations to GF as of the end of our fiscal year for wafer receipts and research and development activities.
We negotiate our purchase commitments with GF on an annual basis and as such we cannot meaningfully quantify or estimate our future payment obligations to GF.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fifth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
On April 27, 2007, we issued $2.2 billion aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
Our 6.00% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year beginning November 1, 2007 until the maturity date of May 1, 2015.
The terms of our 6.00% Notes are governed by an indenture dated April 27, 2007, by and between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
During the first quarter of 2014, we repurchased $64 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes in open market transactions for $69 million, which included payment of accrued and unpaid interest of $1 million.
Also, during 2014, we repurchased a portion of our 6.00% Notes through a partial tender offer.
We repurchased $423 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes for $460 million in cash, which included payment of accrued and unpaid interest of $10 million.
We incurred a total loss of $10 million in connection with the foregoing repurchases of our 6.00% Notes.
In 2013, we repurchased $50 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes in open market transactions for $53 million.
As of December 27, 2014, the outstanding aggregate principal amount and remaining carrying value of our 6.00% Notes were $42 million.
The remaining $42 million of aggregate principal amount of 6.00% Notes has been reclassified as short-term debt on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 27, 2014 due May 2015.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 6.00% Notes.
On November 30, 2009, we issued $500 million of our 8.125% Notes at a discount of 10.204%.
During 2014, we repurchased and redeemed the entire $500 million in aggregate principal amount of our 8.125% Notes for $531 million, which included payment of accrued and unpaid interest of $8 million.
We incurred a total loss of $54 million in connection with the foregoing repurchase and redemption of the 8.125% Notes.
As of December 27, 2014, we did not have any 8.125% Notes outstanding.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 8.125% Notes.
On February 26, 2014, we issued $600 million of our 6.75% Notes.
Our 6.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on March 1 and September 1 of each year beginning September 1, 2014 until the maturity date of March 1, 2019.
Our 6.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 6.75% Indenture) dated February 26, 2014 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
At any time before March 1, 2019, we may redeem some or all of our 6.75% Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a “make whole” premium (as set forth in the 6.75% Indenture).
As of December 27, 2014, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 6.75% Notes was $600 million, and we reported $600 million of the 6.75% Notes on our consolidated balance sheets.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 6.75% Notes.
On August 4, 2010, we issued $500 million of our 7.75% Notes.
Our 7.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 1 and August 1 of each year beginning February 1, 2011 until the maturity date of August 1, 2020.
Our 7.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated August 4, 2010 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
Starting August 1, 2015, we may redeem our 7.75% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on August 1, 2015 through July 31, 2016                                                                                          103.875% Beginning on August 1, 2016 through July 31, 2017                                                                                          102.583% Beginning on August 1, 2017 through July 31, 2018                                                                                          101.292% As of December 27, 2014, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Notes was $450 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.75% Notes.
On August 15, 2012, we issued $500 million of our 7.50% Notes.
Our 7.50% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year beginning February 15, 2013 until the maturity date of August 15, 2022.
The 7.50% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture dated August 15, 2012 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as trustee.
At any time (which may be more than once) before August 15, 2015, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Notes within 90 days of the closing of an equity offering with the net proceeds thereof at a redemption price equal to 107.5% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date of redemption.
At any time before August 15, 2022, we may redeem some or all of our 7.50% Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a “make whole” premium (as set forth in the 7.50% Indenture).
As of December 27, 2014, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Notes was $475 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.50% Notes.
On June 16, 2014, we issued $500 million of 7.00% Notes.
The 7.00% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year beginning January 1, 2015 until the maturity date of July 1, 2024.
The 7.00% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 7.00% Indenture) dated June 16, 2014 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
At any time before July 1, 2017, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the 7.00% Notes within 90 days of the closing of an equity offering with the net proceeds thereof at a redemption price equal to 107.000% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date of redemption.
Prior to July 1, 2019, we may redeem some or all of the 7.00% Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a “make whole” premium (as set forth in the 7.00% Indenture).
Starting July 1, 2019, we may redeem our 7.00% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020                                                                                              103.500% Beginning on July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021                                                                                              102.333% Beginning on July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022                                                                                              101.167% As of December 27, 2014, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.00% Notes was $500 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding our 7.00% Notes.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire our 6.00% Notes, 6.75% Notes, 7.75% Notes, 7.50% Notes and 7.00% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
We and our subsidiary, AMD International Sales & Service, Ltd. (together, the Borrowers), entered into a loan and security agreement on November 12, 2013, as amended on December 11, 2014 (the Loan Agreement) for our Secured Revolving Line of Credit for a principal amount of up to $500 million, with up to $75 million available for issuance of letters of credit, with a group of lenders and Bank of America, N.A., acting as agent for the lenders (the Agent).
Borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit are limited to up to 85% of eligible account receivable minus certain reserves and may be used for general corporate purposes, including working capital needs.
The Borrowers can elect that the borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit may bear interest at a rate per annum equal to (a) London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.75%, or (b) (i) the greater of (x) the Agent’s prime rate, (y) the federal funds rate as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York plus 0.50%, and (z) LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1.00%, plus (ii) an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 1.75%.
The applicable margin to be applied to the borrowings under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit is dependent on the Borrowers achieving a certain fixed charge coverage ratio.
Our Secured Revolving Line of Credit may be optionally prepaid or terminated or unutilized commitments may be reduced, in each case at any time without premium or penalty.
In connection with our Secured Revolving Line of Credit, the Borrowers are required to pay an unused line fee equal to 0.50% per annum, payable monthly on the unused amount of the commitments under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit.
The unused line fee decreases to 0.375% per annum when more than 50% of our Secured Revolving Line of Credit is utilized.
The Borrowers will pay (i) a monthly fee on all letters of credit outstanding under our Secured Revolving Line of Credit equal to the applicable LIBOR margin and (ii) a fronting fee to the Agent equal to 0.125% of all such letters of credit, payable monthly in arrears.
The obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by a first priority basis in the Borrowers’ account receivable, inventory and certain deposit accounts and specified related assets.
The Loan Agreement contains covenants that place certain restrictions on the Borrowers’ ability to, among other things, amend or modify certain terms of any debt of $50 million or more or subordinated debt, create or suffer to exist any liens upon accounts or inventory, sell or transfer any of Borrowers’ accounts or inventory other than certain ordinary-course transfers, make certain changes to either Borrower’s name or form or state of organization without notifying the Agent, or liquidate, dissolve, merge, combine or consolidate.
Further restrictions apply during a domestic cash trigger period (a Domestic Cash Trigger Period), which occurs (i) upon an event of default or (ii) when the amount of domestic cash or cash equivalents held in certain accounts is at any time less than $250 million, and ends when both (a) no event of default has existed for 45 days and (b) the amount of domestic cash or cash equivalents held in such accounts has been equal to or greater than $250 million for 45 days.
Such restrictions limit the Borrowers’ ability to, among other things, allow certain subsidiaries that manufacture or process inventory for the Borrowers to borrow secured debt or unsecured debt beyond a certain amount, create any liens upon any of the Borrowers’ property (other than customary permitted liens and liens on up to $1.5 billion of secured credit facilities debt (which amount includes our Secured Revolving Line of Credit)), declare or make any distributions, create any encumbrance on the ability of a subsidiary to make any upstream payments, make asset dispositions other than certain ordinary course dispositions, make certain loans, make payments with respect to subordinated debt or certain borrowed money prior to its due date, become a party to certain agreements restricting the Borrowers’ ability to incur or repay debt, grant liens, make distributions, or modify loan agreements or enter into any non-arm’s-length transaction with an affiliate.
During a Domestic Cash Trigger Period, the Borrowers are subject to financial covenants requirement and are required to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of 1:1 for each trailing four-fiscal quarter period ending on and after March 29, 2014.
At December 27, 2014, the Secured Revolving Line of Credit had an outstanding loan balance of $130 million, with an interest rate of 4.25%, $6 million related to outstanding Letters of Credit, and up to $364 million available for future borrowings.
As of December 27, 2014, we were in compliance with all required covenants stated in the Loan Agreement.
The agreements governing our 6.00% Notes, 6.75% Notes, 7.75% Notes, 7.50% Notes, 7.00% Notes and our Secured Revolving Line of Credit contain cross-default provisions whereby a default under one agreement would likely result in cross defaults under agreements covering other borrowings.
The occurrence of a default under any of these borrowing arrangements would permit the applicable note holders or the lenders under the Secured Revolving Line of Credit to declare all amounts outstanding under those borrowing arrangements to be immediately due and payable.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above primarily consisted of $67 million of payments due under certain software and technology licenses that will be paid through 2018.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above exclude amounts recorded on our consolidated balance sheet that do not require us to make cash payments, which, as of December 27, 2014, primarily consisted of $17 million of deferred gains resulting from certain real estate transactions that occurred in Sunnyvale, California in 1998, in Markham, Ontario, Canada in 2008 and in Singapore in 2013.
Deferred rent related to our facilities in Sunnyvale, California of $7 million and accruals related to facility consolidation and site closure costs under our 2012 restructuring plan of $6 million are excluded from other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above as they are included in the operating leases obligations.
Also excluded from other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above are $5 million of environmental reserves and $3 million of non-current unrecognized tax benefits, which represent potential cash payments that could be payable by us upon settlements with the related authorities.
We have not included these amounts in the contractual obligations table above because we cannot make reasonably reliable estimates regarding the timing of the settlements with the related authorities, if any.
As of December 27, 2014, we had aggregate outstanding capital lease obligations of $12 million for one of our facilities in Canada, which is payable in monthly installments through 2017.
We lease certain of our facilities, and in some jurisdictions, we lease the land on which these facilities are built under non-cancelable lease agreements that expire at various dates through 2025.
We lease certain manufacturing and office equipment for terms ranging from one to five years.
Total future non-cancelable lease obligations as of December 27, 2014 were $340 million, including approximately $284 million of future lease payments and estimated operating costs related to real estate in Austin, Texas, Sunnyvale, California and Singapore that we sold and leased back.
Our purchase obligations primarily include our obligations to purchase wafers and substrates from third parties, excluding our wafer purchase commitments to GF under the WSA.
As of December 27, 2014, total non-cancelable purchase obligations were $688 million.
Obligations to GF represent all of our expected cash payments to GF based on wafer receipts and research and development activities.
As of December 27, 2014, payments owed to GF were $80 million.
We are currently in the process of negotiating a fifth amendment to the WSA, and we expect that our future purchases from GF will continue to be material.
As of December 27, 2014, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and long-term debt.
We usually invest our cash in investments with short maturities or with frequent interest reset terms.
Accordingly, our interest income fluctuates with short-term market conditions.
As of December 27, 2014, our investment portfolio consisted primarily of commercial paper, corporate bonds and money market funds.
These investments were highly liquid.
Due to the relatively short, weighted-average maturity of our investment portfolio and the current low interest rate environment, our exposure to interest rate risk is minimal.
As of December 27, 2014, the majority of our outstanding debt had fixed interest rates.
Consequently, our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates on reported interest expense and corresponding cash flows is minimal.
We will continue to monitor our exposure to interest rate risk.
We mitigate default risk in our investment portfolio by investing in only high credit quality securities and by constantly positioning our portfolio to respond to a significant reduction in a credit rating of any investment issuer or guarantor.
Our portfolio includes investments in debt and marketable equity securities with active secondary or resale markets to ensure portfolio liquidity.
We are averse to principal loss and strive to preserve our invested funds by limiting default risk and market risk.
We actively monitor market conditions and developments specific to the securities and security classes in which we invest.
We believe that we take a conservative approach to investing our funds in that we invest only in highly-rated debt securities with relatively short maturities and do not invest in securities we believe involve a higher degree of risk.
As of December 27, 2014, substantially all of our investments in debt securities were A rated by at least one of the rating agencies.
While we believe we take prudent measures to mitigate investment related risks, such risks cannot be fully eliminated as there are circumstances outside of our control.
There were no sales of available-for-sale securities during 2014.
The following table presents the cost basis, fair value and related weighted-average interest rates by year of maturity for our investment portfolio and debt obligations as of December 27, 2014: Foreign Exchange Risk.
As a result of our foreign operations, we incur costs and we carry assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies, while sales of products are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars.
We maintain a foreign currency hedging strategy, which uses derivative financial instruments to mitigate the risks associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
This strategy takes into consideration all of our exposures.
We do not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
In applying our strategy, from time to time, we use foreign currency forward contracts to hedge certain forecasted expenses denominated in foreign currencies.
We designate these contracts as cash flow hedges of forecasted expenses, to the extent eligible under the accounting rules, and evaluate hedge effectiveness prospectively and retrospectively.
As such, the effective portion of the gain or loss on these contracts is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and reclassified to earnings in the same line item as the associated forecasted transaction and in the same period during which the hedged transaction affects earnings.
Any ineffective portion is immediately recorded in earnings.
We also use, from time to time, foreign currency forward contracts to economically hedge recognized foreign currency exposures on the balance sheets of various subsidiaries.
We do not designate these forward contracts as hedging instruments.
Accordingly, the gain or loss associated with these contracts is immediately recorded in earnings.
The following table provides information about our foreign currency forward contracts as of December 27, 2014 and December 28, 2013.
All of our foreign currency forward contracts mature within 12 months.
In addition, we use fixed-to-floating interest rate swaps to manage a portion of our exposure to interest rate risk by converting fixed rate interest payments of a portion of our 6.75% Notes to floating rate interest payments based on LIBOR.
The notional amount of the interest rate swap we entered into was $250 million as of December 27, 2014.
The interest rate swaps are designated as a fair value hedge.
All changes in fair value of the swaps are recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets with no net impact to the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
As part of our strategy to respond to the macroeconomic issues and the changes occurring in our industry, during 2012, we made key strategic investments to align our business to a changing computing landscape and to position ourselves to take advantage of new opportunities in adjacent high-growth markets.
In March 2012, we acquired SeaMicro, Inc. (SeaMicro), an energy-efficient, high-bandwidth micro-server company, to accelerate our strategy to deliver differentiated micro-server solutions to cloud data centers.
In June 2012, we, along with ARM, Imagination Technologies, Media Tek, Qualcomm, Samsung and Texas Instruments established the Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA) Foundation, a non-profit consortium established to define and promote an open standards-based approach to heterogeneous computing.
In October 2012, we announced that we will design 64-bit ARM® technology-based processors in addition to our x86 processors for multiple markets, starting with cloud and data center servers.
We expect our first ARM technology-based processor will be a highly-integrated, 64-bit multicore system-on-a-chip optimized for the dense, energy-efficient servers.
The first ARM technology-based AMD Opteron processor for servers is targeted for production in 2014 and is expected to integrate our AMD SeaMicro Freedom supercompute fabric.
In addition, in the fourth quarter of 2012, we announced a restructuring plan to improve our cost structure and enhance our competitiveness in core growth areas.
This restructuring plan primarily involves a reduction of our global workforce of approximately 14% as well as asset impairments and facility consolidations.
We expect the restructuring action will result in operational savings, primarily in operating expenses, of approximately $190 million in 2013.
Further, to better align with today’s PC market dynamics, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA with GF.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 under the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products to be delivered by GF to us during 2013 and through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we committed to purchase a fixed number of production wafers at negotiated prices in the fourth quarter of 2012 and through December 31, 2013.
GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration of this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
As a result, we recorded a $273 million LCM charge in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee will be spread over several quarters, with $80 million that was paid by December 28, 2012 and $40 million payable by April 1, 2013.
For the remainder of the fee, on the same date we entered into the third amendment, we issued a $200 million promissory note to GF that matures on December 31, 2013.
Under the third amendment to the WSA, we committed to purchase from GF wafers for approximately $1.15 billion in 2013 and $250 million during the first quarter of 2014.
We expect to negotiate the remainder of our 2014 purchase commitments from GF in 2013.
Despite the challenging macroeconomic environment, we continued to focus on executing our engineering milestones.
We launched our next AMD A-Series APU, codenamed “Trinity,” and our next generation AMD E-Series APU, codenamed “Brazos 2.0.” We also announced our AMD Z-60 APU, codenamed “Hondo,” our lowest powered APU designed for the performance tablet and small form factor PC market.
We launched our AMD Opteron™ 3200, 4300 and 3300 Series server processor platforms based on our next-generation “Piledriver” core architecture.
We announced AMD’s SeaMicro SM15000 server chassis, which extends fabric-based computing across racks and aisles of the data center to connect directly to large data storage systems.
With respect to our graphics products, we launched our AMD Radeon™ HD 7950 graphics processor, and our AMD Radeon HD 7700 and 7800 series graphics processors, all based on 28nm process technology and designed for enthusiast desktop gamers.
On March 2, 2009, we consummated the transactions contemplated by the Master Transaction Agreement among us, Advanced Technology Investment Company LLC (ATIC), and West Coast Hitech L.P. (WCH), pursuant to which we formed GF.
Based on the structure of the transaction and the guidance on accounting for interests in variable interest entities, during 2009, GF was deemed a variable-interest entity, and we were deemed to be the primary beneficiary.
Therefore, we consolidated the accounts of GF from March 2, 2009 through December 26, 2009.
At the Closing, AMD, ATIC and GF also entered into a Shareholders’ Agreement (the Shareholders’ Agreement), a Funding Agreement (the Funding Agreement), and a Wafer Supply Agreement (the WSA).
The Shareholders’ Agreement set forth the rights and obligations of AMD and ATIC as shareholders of GF.
The initial GF board of directors (GF Board) consisted of eight directors, and AMD and ATIC each designated four directors.
We were no longer a party to the Shareholders’ Agreement as of March 4, 2012.
The Funding Agreement provided for the funding of GF and governed the terms and conditions under which ATIC was obligated to provide such funding.
We were no longer a party to the Funding Agreement as of March 4, 2012.
The WSA governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, during 2010, we purchased substantially all of our microprocessor unit (MPU) product requirements from GF.
During 2010, we paid GF for wafers on a cost-plus basis.
If we acquire a third-party business that manufactures MPU products, we will have up to two years to transition the manufacture of such MPU products to GF.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider, and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
This agreement has been subsequently modified, as disclosed below.
On December 18, 2009, ATIC International Investment Company (ATIC II) acquired Chartered Semiconductor Manufacturing Ltd. (Chartered).
On December 28, 2009, with our consent, ATIC II, Chartered and GF entered into a Management and Operating Agreement (MOA), which provided for the joint management and operation of GF and Chartered, thereby allowing GF and Chartered to share costs, take advantage of operating synergies and market wafer fabrications services on a collective basis.
In order to allow for the signing of the MOA on December 28, 2009, prior to obtaining any regulatory approvals, we agreed to irrevocably waive rights under the Shareholders Agreement with respect to certain matters that require unanimous GF Board approval.
Additionally, if any such matters came before the GF Board, we agreed that our designated GF directors will vote in the same manner as the majority of ATIC-designated GF Board members voting on any such matters.
As a result of waiving such approval rights, as of December 28, 2009, for financial reporting purposes we no longer shared control with ATIC over GF.
In June 2009, the FASB issued an amendment to improve financial reporting by enterprises involved with variable interest entities.
Based on the results of our evaluation and in light of the governance changes whereby we believed we only had protective rights relative to the operations of GF, we concluded that the other investor in GF, ATIC, was the party who had the power to direct the activities of GF that most significantly impact GF’s performance and was, therefore, the primary beneficiary of GF.
Accordingly, effective as of December 27, 2009, we deconsolidated GF, and during 2010 we accounted for our ownership interest in GF under the equity method of accounting.
For purposes of our application of the equity method of accounting during 2010, we recorded our share of GF’s results excluding the results of Chartered because GF did not have an equity ownership interest in Chartered.
The terms of the Funding Agreement and the WSA described above were not affected by the deconsolidation of GF.
Following the deconsolidation, GF became our related party.
During 2010, ATIC contributed $930 million of cash to GF.
We did not participate in the funding.
These contributions resulted in an aggregate gain on our ownership interest of $232 million, which we recorded as part of the equity in net loss of investee line item on our consolidated statement of operations.
On December 27, 2010, pursuant to the Contribution Agreement, ATIC International Investment Company LLC, an affiliate of ATIC, contributed all of the outstanding Ordinary Shares of GFS to GF.
As the result of dilution of our ownership in GF, during the first quarter of 2011 and the year ended December 31, 2011, we recognized a non-cash gain of approximately $492 million, net of certain transaction related charges, in Equity income (loss) and dilution gain in investee, net.
Following the GFS contribution and governance changes described above, we assessed our ability to exercise significant influence over GF and considered factors such as our representation on GF’s board of directors, participation in GF’s policy-making processes, material intra- entity transactions, interchange of managerial personnel, technological dependency, and the extent of our ownership in relation to ownership by the other shareholders.
Based on the results of our assessment, we concluded that we no longer had the ability to exercise significant influence over GF.
Accordingly, as of the first quarter of 2011, we changed our method of accounting for our ownership interest in GF from the equity method to the cost method of accounting.
Under the cost method of accounting, we no longer recognized any share of GF’s net income or loss in our consolidated statement of operations.
In addition, we reviewed the carrying value of our investment in GF for impairment at each reporting period.
Impairment indicators, among other factors, include significant deterioration in GF’s earnings performance or business prospects, significant changes in the market conditions in which GF operates, and GF’s ability to continue as a going concern.
During the fourth quarter of 2011, we identified indicators of impairment, including revised financial projections which we received from GF.
The fair value of our GF investment was determined by a valuation analysis of GF’s Class A Preferred Shares, utilizing the revised financial projections.
We concluded the decline in fair value was other than temporary.
As a result of the valuation analysis, we recorded a non- cash impairment charge of approximately $209 million, based on the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the investment as of December 31, 2011.
As of December 31, 2011, our investment balance in GF after impairment was $278 million.
On April 2, 2011, we entered into a first amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the first amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors, including APU products.
The first amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
Pursuant to the first amendment, GF committed to provide us with, and we committed to purchase, a fixed number of 45nm and 32nm wafers per quarter in 2011.
We paid GF a fixed price for 45nm wafers delivered in 2011.
Our price for 32nm wafers varied based on the wafer volumes and manufacturing yield of such wafers and was based on good die.
In addition, we also agreed to pay an additional quarterly amount to GF during 2012 totaling up to $430 million if GF met specified conditions related to the continued availability of 32nm capacity as of the beginning of 2012.
As part of the second amendment described below, GF agreed to waive these quarterly payments, and therefore we are no longer required to pay them.
On March 4, 2012, we entered into a second amendment to the WSA with GF.
The primary effect of this second amendment was to modify certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products to be delivered by GF to us during 2012.
Pursuant to the second amendment, GF committed to provide us with, and we committed to purchase, a fixed number of production wafers in 2012.
We paid GF fixed prices for production wafers delivered in 2012.
The second amendment also granted us certain rights to contract with another wafer foundry supplier with respect to specified 28 nm products for a specified period of time.
In consideration for these rights, we agreed to pay GF $425 million and transfer to GF all of the capital stock of GF that we owned.
As a result of us receiving these rights in the first quarter of 2012, we recorded a charge related to this limited waiver of exclusivity from GF of $703 million consisting of the $425 million cash payment and a $278 million non-cash charge representing the carrying and fair value of the capital stock that we transferred to GF.
Pursuant to the second amendment, $150 million of the $425 million was paid on March 5, 2012, $50 million was paid on June 29, 2012 and $50 million was paid on October 1, 2012 with the remaining $175 million paid by December 31, 2012.
In addition, as security for the final two payments, we issued a $225 million promissory note to GF.
As a result of the transfer of our shares of GF capital stock, we no longer owned any GF capital stock.
Also, we are no longer entitled to designate a director to GF’s board, and our designated director resigned effective as of the date of the second amendment.
As of March 4, 2012, we were no longer a party to either the Shareholders’ Agreement or the Funding Agreement.
On December 6, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA with GF.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 under the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products to be delivered by GF to us during 2013 and through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we committed to purchase a fixed number of production wafers at negotiated prices in the fourth quarter of 2012 and through December 31, 2013.
GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration of this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
As a result, we recorded an LCM charge of $273 million for the write-down of inventory to its market value in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee will be spread over several quarters, with $80 million paid by December 28, 2012 and $40 million by April 1, 2013.
For the remainder of the fee, we issued a GF continues to be a related party of AMD.
Our expenses related to GF’s wafer manufacturing were $1.2 billion, $904 million and $1.2 billion in 2012, 2011 and 2010.
Our expenses related to GF’s research and development activities were $49 million, $79 million and $114 million for 2012, 2011 and 2010.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to our revenue, inventories, asset impairments and income taxes.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Although actual results have historically been reasonably consistent with management’s expectations, the actual results may differ from these estimates or our estimates may be affected by different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
We record a provision for estimated sales returns and allowances on product sales for estimated future price reductions and other customer incentives in the same period that the related revenues are recorded.
We base these estimates on actual historical sales returns, allowances, historical price reductions, market activity, and other known or anticipated trends and factors.
These estimates are subject to management’s judgment, and actual provisions could be different from our estimates and current provisions, resulting in future adjustments to our revenues and operating results.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence.
This evaluation includes analysis of sales levels by product and projections of future demand.
These projections assist us in determining the carrying value of our inventory.
In addition, we write off inventories that are considered obsolete.
We adjust the remaining specific inventory balances to approximate the lower of our standard manufacturing cost or market value.
Among other factors, management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining obsolescence and market value.
If, in any period, we anticipate future demand or market conditions to be less favorable than our previous estimates, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be reflected in cost of sales in the period the revision is made.
This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period.
If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written off in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales, resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment present.
We perform the annual goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year.
We evaluate whether goodwill has been impaired at the reporting unit level by first determining whether the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value and, if so, by determining whether the implied fair value of goodwill within the reporting unit is less than the carrying value.
The implied fair value of a reporting unit is determined through the application of one or more valuation models common to our industry, including the income, market and cost approaches.
While market valuation data for comparable companies is gathered and analyzed, we believe that there has not been sufficient comparability between the peer groups and the specific reporting units to allow for the derivation of reliable indications of value using a market approach.
Therefore, we have ultimately employed the income approach which requires estimates of future operating results and cash flows of each of the reporting units, discounted using estimated discount rates.
The key assumptions we have used to determine the fair value of our reporting units includes projected cash flows for the next 10 years and discount rates ranging from 15% to 30%.
Discount rates are based on our weighted-average cost of capital, adjusted for the risks associated with operations.
A variance in the discount rate could have a significant impact on the amount of the goodwill impairment charge recorded, if any.
Based on the results of our annual analysis of goodwill in 2012 and 2011, each reporting unit’s fair values exceeded their carrying values, indicating that there was no goodwill impairment.
For the annual goodwill impairment analysis in 2012, each reporting unit’s estimated fair value exceeded its carrying value ranging from approximately 6% to approximately 170%.
The estimated fair value of our Computing Solutions reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 6%.
Total goodwill relating to our Computing Solutions reporting unit was $230 million as of December 29, 2012.
The reasons for the small excess of fair value over carrying value of the Computing Solutions reporting unit are primarily due to the recent global economic downturn, the changes in our industry, specifically related to the decline in PC sales, and the decline in our market capitalization.
Estimates of fair value for all of our reporting units can be affected by a variety of external and internal factors.
Potential events or circumstances that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the key assumptions we used in estimating the fair value of our Computing Solutions reporting unit include adverse changes in our industry, increased competition, an inability to successfully introduce new products in the marketplace or to achieve internal forecasts, and further decline in our stock price.
If the estimated fair value of our Computing Solutions reporting unit declines due to any of these factors, we may be required to record future goodwill impairment charges.
In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for tax and financial statement reporting purposes.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets.
If recovery is not likely, we must increase our charge to income tax expense, in the form of a valuation allowance, for the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
We consider past performance, future expected taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance.
In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the Internal Revenue Service or other taxing jurisdiction.
If our estimates of these taxes are greater or less than actual results, an additional tax benefit or charge will result.
We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as interest expense and income tax expense.
Management, including the Chief Operating Decision Maker, who is our Chief Executive Officer, reviews and assesses our operating performance using segment net revenue and operating income (loss) before interest, other income (expense), net and income taxes.
These performance measures include the allocation of expenses to the operating segments based on management’s judgment.
We use the following two reportable operating segments: the Computing Solutions segment, which includes microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an APU, chipsets and embedded processors; and the Graphics segment, which includes graphics, video and multimedia products developed for use in desktop and notebook computers, including home media PCs, professional workstations and servers as well as revenue received in connection with the development and sale of game console systems that incorporate our graphics technology.
In addition to these reportable segments, we have an All Other category, which is not a reportable segment.
This category includes certain expenses and credits that were not allocated to any of the operating segments because management does not consider these expenses and credits in evaluating the performance of the operating segments.
Also included in this category are amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock- based compensation expense, restructuring charges and a charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF.
We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, the primary factors that resulted in those changes and how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our financial statements.
We use a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending last Saturday in December.
The years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 included 52 weeks, 53 weeks and 52 weeks.
The extra week in 2011 did not have a material impact on our results of operations.
References in this report to 2012, 2011 and 2010 refer to the fiscal year unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The following table provides a summary of net revenue and operating income (loss) by segment and income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes for 2012, 2011 and 2010.
Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes Computing Solutions net revenue of $4.0 billion in 2012 decreased by 20% compared to $5.0 billion in 2011 as a result of a 14% decrease in unit shipments and a 7% decrease in average selling price.
Unit shipments of all categories of products decreased.
The decrease in the average selling price was primarily attributable to a decrease in average selling price of our microprocessors for desktop PCs and servers.
Unit shipments and average selling price of our microprocessors for desktop PCs decreased due to challenging market conditions and the increasing popularity of tablets as a consumer device of choice, which resulted in decreased demand for our products.
Unit shipments and average selling price of our microprocessors for servers decreased primarily due to challenging market conditions.
Computing Solutions net revenue of $5.0 billion in 2011 increased 4% compared to net revenue of $4.8 billion in 2010, primarily as a result of a 16% increase in unit shipments partially offset by an 11% decrease in average selling price.
The increase in unit shipments was attributable to an increase in unit shipments of our microprocessors, including APU products for mobile devices, as well as our chipset products.
Unit shipments of our microprocessors, including APU products for mobile devices increased due to strong demand for our Brazos and Llano-based APU platforms.
However, the increase in unit shipments in 2011 was limited by supply constraints with respect to certain microprocessor products manufactured using the 32nm technology node.
Chipset unit shipments increased primarily due to an increase in overall unit shipments of our microprocessor products.
The decrease in overall average selling price was primarily attributable to a decrease in the average selling price of our microprocessors for servers due to a shift in our product mix and competitive market conditions as well as sales of our Brazos APU platforms, which have a lower average selling price than our other processor products.
Computing Solutions operating loss was $231 million in 2012 compared to operating income of $556 million in 2011.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $136 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses, a $45 million decrease in research and development expenses and a $29 million decrease in cost of sales.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower unit shipments, partially offset by the $273 million LCM charge related to the fee for GF’s waiver of a portion of our obligations and an inventory write-down of $100 million during the third quarter of 2012 as a result of lower than anticipated future demand for certain products, mainly first generation A-Series APU products, codenamed “Llano”.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Computing Solutions operating income was $556 million in 2011 compared to $529 million in 2010.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to the increase in net revenue referenced above, partially offset by a $70 million increase in cost of sales, a $45 million increase in research and development expenses and a $42 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses.
Cost of sales increased primarily due to higher microprocessor and chipsets unit shipments and the absence of a one-time benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF in 2010.
Research and development expenses and marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Graphics net revenue of $1.4 billion in 2012 decreased by 9% compared to net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2011.
The decrease was primarily due to a 16% decrease in net revenue from sales of GPU products, partially offset by an increase in net revenue received in connection with the development and sale of game console systems that incorporate our graphics technology.
Net revenue from sales of GPU products decreased due to lower unit shipments, partially offset by increased average selling price.
GPU unit shipments decreased due to challenging market conditions.
GPU average selling price increased primarily due to improved product mix.
Graphics net revenue of $1.6 billion in 2011 decreased by 6% compared to net revenue of $1.7 billion in 2010.
The decrease was due primarily to a 6% decrease in net revenue from sales of GPU products.
Net revenue from sales of GPU products decreased primarily due to a decrease in both GPU unit shipments and average selling price.
The decrease in GPU unit shipments was primarily due to lower customer demand, which we believe was due in part to the disruption in the supply of hard disk drives caused by the flooding in Thailand at the beginning of 2011.
GPU average selling price decreased due to a shift in our product mix to lower-end GPU products.
Graphics operating income was $105 million in 2012 compared to $51 million in 2011.
The improvement in operating results was primarily due to a $101 million decrease in cost of sales, a $60 million decrease in research and development expenses and a $41 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses partially offset by the decrease in net revenue referenced above.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower GPU shipments and correspondingly lower manufacturing costs.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses decreased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses” below.
Graphics operating income was $51 million in 2011 compared to $149 million in 2010.
The decline in operating results was primarily due to the decrease in net revenue referenced above and a $20 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $25 million decrease in cost of sales.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses increased for the reasons set forth under “Expenses,” below.
Cost of sales decreased primarily due to lower GPU shipments and correspondingly lower manufacturing costs.
All Other revenue was immaterial in 2012 and 2011 and $14 million in 2010.
All Other revenue declined because as of 2009, we no longer developed new Handheld products.
We decided to exit the Handheld business after selling certain graphics and multimedia technology assets and intellectual property to Qualcomm in the first quarter of 2009.
All Other operating loss of $930 million in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, $100 million of net restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense of $97 million and $14 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets.
All Other operating loss of $239 million in 2011 included $98 million of net restructuring charges, $90 million of stock-based compensation expense, $29 million related to amortization of acquired intangible assets and a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF primarily related to certain GF manufacturing assets that did not benefit us.
All Other operating income of $170 million in 2010 included $283 million of income from the settlement of our litigation with Samsung in the fourth quarter of 2010, a $30 million one-time benefit recognized in the first quarter of 2010 related to the deconsolidation of GF, and $14 million of net revenue, partially offset by $87 million of stock-based compensation expense and $61 million related to the amortization of acquired intangible assets.
The following is a summary of certain consolidated statement of operations data for 2012, 2011 and 2010.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 23% in 2012 compared to 45% in 2011.
Gross margin in 2012 included a $703 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, a LCM charge of $273 million and a $5 million charge recorded to cost of sales related to a legal settlement.
Gross margin in 2011 included a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF primarily related to certain GF manufacturing assets and a charge of approximately $5 million recorded to cost of sales related to a legal settlement.
Absent the effects of the charges as described above, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 41% in 2012 compared to 45% in 2011.
Gross margin in 2012 was also adversely impacted by the $100 million inventory write-down in the third quarter of 2012 referenced above as well as lower average selling price for microprocessor products.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 45% in 2011 compared to 46% in 2010.
Gross margin in 2011 included a $24 million charge recorded in connection with a payment to GF for certain GF manufacturing assets and a charge of approximately $5 million related to a legal settlement.
Gross margin in 2010 included a $69 million benefit related to the deconsolidation of GF.
Absent the effects of these events, which we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, our gross margin would have been 45% in each of 2011 and 2010.
Gross margin, as adjusted for the factors described above, remained flat in 2011 compared to 2010.
During 2011, unit shipments of our low-cost, margin accretive Brazos APU platforms increased compared to 2010.
However, this improvement in gross margin was offset by an unfavorable mix in supply of microprocessor products manufactured using the 32nm technology node and a decline in average selling price of our microprocessor products for servers.
Research and development expenses of $1.4 billion in 2012, decreased by $99 million, or 7%, compared to $1.5 billion in 2011.
The decrease was due to a $60 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics segment and a $45 million decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment, partially offset by a $6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense recorded in the All Other category.
Research and development expenses attributable to our Graphics segment decreased as a result of a $36 million decrease in product engineering and design costs, a $16 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense and a $9 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses.
The decrease in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment was primarily due to a $26 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense, an $11 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses related to GF for our future products and a $9 million decrease in product engineering and design costs.
Research and development expenses of $1.5 billion in 2011, increased by $48 million, or 3%, compared to $1.4 billion in 2010.
The increase was primarily due to a $45 million increase in research and development expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment as a result of a $79 million increase in product engineering and design costs for our future products, partially offset by a $27 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense and a $7 million decrease in manufacturing process technology expenses related to GF for our future products.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $823 million in 2012 decreased by $169 million, or 17%, compared to $992 million in 2011, reflecting the effect of the 2011 restructuring plan and our efforts to reduce operating expenses.
The decrease was primarily due to a $136 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $41 million decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics segment, partially offset by a $6 million increase in corporate general and administrative expenses attributable to our acquisition of SeaMicro, which we recorded in the All Other category.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment decreased primarily due to an $111 million decrease in sales and marketing activities and a $22 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
The decrease in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics segment was a result of a $24 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses and a $16 million decrease in sales and marketing activities.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses of $992 million in 2011, increased by $58 million, or 6%, compared to $934 million in 2010.
The increase was primarily due to a $42 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment and a $20 million increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Graphics segment.
The increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses attributable to our Computing Solutions segment was primarily due to a $41 million increase in sales and marketing activities resulting from an increase in regional marketing programs and labor expenses and a $14 million increase in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $12 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefit expense.
The increase in marketing, general and administrative expenses in our Graphics segment was primarily due to a $22 million increase in sales and marketing activities resulting from an increase in regional marketing programs and labor expenses.
In the fourth quarter of 2010, we entered into a Patent License and Settlement Agreement with Samsung to end all outstanding legal disputes related to pending patent litigation between us and Samsung.
Pursuant to this agreement, all claims between the parties were dismissed with prejudice and Samsung agreed to pay us $283 million less any withholding taxes.
We received the first payment of $119 million (which represents $143 million less withholding taxes) in December 2010.
The remaining amount of $117 million (which represents $140 million less withholding taxes) was paid in two equal installments in May 2011 and in November 2011.
In addition, pursuant to the settlement agreement, Samsung granted us, and we granted to Samsung, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all patents and patent applications for ten years after the effective date of the Agreement to make, have made, use, sell, offer to sell, import and otherwise dispose of certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products anywhere in the world.
This settlement encompassed all patent litigation and disputes between the parties.
At the time we entered into the Agreement, we did not have any future obligations that we were required to perform in order to earn this settlement payment.
Accordingly, we recognized the entire settlement amount in our operating results for the fourth quarter of 2010.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets was $14 million in 2012, $29 million in 2011 and $61 million in 2010.
The decrease from 2011 to 2012 was due to the reduced amortization base amount of the acquired intangible assets, offset by the acquisition of SeaMicro intangible assets in 2012.
The decrease from 2010 to 2011 was due to the reduced amortization base amount of acquired intangible assets.
In the fourth quarter of 2012, we implemented a restructuring plan designed to improve our cost structure and to strengthen our competitiveness in core growth areas.
The plan primarily involves a workforce reduction of approximately 14% as well as asset impairments and facility consolidations.
We recorded restructuring expense in the fourth quarter of 2012 of approximately $90 million.
Substantially all of the restructuring expense is related to severance.
Of the total restructuring expense, approximately $46 million related to cash payments in the fourth quarter of 2012, with the remaining $41 million related to anticipated cash payments in 2013.
The non-cash portion of the restructuring expense included approximately $4 million of asset impairments.
We plan to substantially complete the plan by the end of the first quarter of 2013.
We are currently evaluating further facility consolidations, and depending on the outcome of such evaluation, we may incur additional restructuring charges, which may be material.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, we initiated a restructuring plan to strengthen our competitive positioning, implement a more competitive cost structure and conduct a workforce rebalancing to better address faster growing market segments.
The plan included a workforce reduction of approximately 13% and contract and program terminations.
We recorded a $100 million restructuring charge in the fourth quarter of 2011 and an additional $8 million restructuring charge in 2012, which consisted of $62 million for severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits, $46 million for contract or program termination costs and $1 million for asset impairments.
The plan was substantially completed as of the end of the first quarter of 2012.
The following table provides a summary of the activity related to the 2012 and 2011 restructuring plans and the remaining related liabilities recorded in “Other current liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 29, 2012: In the fourth quarter of 2008, we initiated a restructuring plan to reduce our cost structure, which was substantially completed in 2009.
In 2011, we reversed approximately $2 million of costs associated with the 2008 restructuring plan because the actual restoration costs for vacated facilities were lower than previously estimated.
In 2010, we reversed approximately $4 million of costs associated with the 2008 restructuring plan because the actual severance and costs related to the continuation of certain employee benefits were lower than previously estimated.
The following table provides a summary of each major type of cost associated with the 2012, 2011 and 2008 restructuring plans for the periods presented: Interest income was $8 million in 2012 compared to $10 million in 2011.
The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and a decrease in the weighted-average interest rate during 2012.
Interest income of $10 million in 2011 was relatively flat as compared to $11 million in 2010.
The weighted-average interest rate decreased in 2011 compared to 2010.
However, the impact of this was offset by an increase in average cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance during 2011.
Interest expense was $175 million in 2012 compared to $180 million in 2011 and $199 million in 2010.
Interest expense decreased primarily due to the net reduction in the principal amount of our outstanding debt.
Other income, net in 2012 was $6 million compared to $199 million of other expense, net in 2011 and $311 million of other income, net in 2010.
In 2012, we recognized $6 million of other income, net primarily due to other income recorded in the third quarter of 2012, partially offset by a $5 million loss from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and a $4 million other-than-temporary impairment charge related to one of our auction rate securities (ARS) investments.
In 2011, we recognized an impairment charge on our investment in GF of approximately $209 million and a $6 million loss related to our repurchase of $200 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2015 (6.00% Notes), partially offset by $8 million gain on foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
In 2010, we recognized a non-cash gain related to the deconsolidation of GF of approximately $325 million, a $17 million gain from the sale of our marketable securities and an $8 million gain related to an earn-out payment that we received in connection with the acquisition of a company that we had invested in, partially offset by a $24 million loss related to our repurchase of $1,016 million principal amount of our 6.00% Notes and $14 million loss due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
We recorded an income tax benefit of $34 million and $4 million in 2012 and 2011 and an income tax provision of $38 million in 2010.
The income tax benefit in 2012 was primarily due to a tax benefit of $36 million relating to the SeaMicro acquisition, a $1 million tax benefit for the tax effects of items credited directly to other comprehensive income, a $2 million tax benefit for Canadian co-op tax credits and a $9 million tax benefit associated with the successful negotiation of a tax holiday in a foreign jurisdiction net of $14 million of foreign taxes in profitable locations.
The income tax benefit in 2011 was primarily due to tax benefits of $4 million from the monetization of U.S. and Canadian tax credits, a The income tax provision in 2010 was primarily due to withholding taxes paid to the Korean tax authorities in connection with the payment we received from Samsung in December 2010 pursuant to the Patent License and Settlement Agreement as well as foreign taxes in profitable locations offset by benefits, including the monetization of U.S. research and development credits, an alternative minimum tax refund on net operating loss carryback in the United States and the reversal of unrecognized tax benefits in foreign jurisdictions.
As of December 29, 2012, substantially all of our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, continued to be subject to a valuation allowance.
The realization of these assets is dependent on substantial future taxable income which, at December 29, 2012, in management’s estimate, is not more likely than not to be achieved.
On January 2, 2013 the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 (Act) was passed into law.
The Act included a retroactive extension of the U.S. research credit for 2012.
Since the effects of tax law changes are recognized in the first period which includes the date of enactment, the Act had no impact on our 2012 tax provision.
The impact on our 2013 tax provision will be immaterial due to the valuation allowance.
From December 27, 2009 to December 25, 2010, the period during which we applied the equity method of accounting for our ownership interest in GF, our equity in net loss of investee primarily consisted of our proportionate share of GF’s losses for the period based on our ownership percentage of GF’s Class A Preferred Shares, our portion of the non-cash accretion on GF’s Class B Preferred Shares, the elimination of intercompany profit, reflecting the mark-up on inventory that remained on our consolidated balance sheet at the end of the period, the amortization of basis differences identified from the purchase price allocation process, based on the fair value of GF upon deconsolidation, and, to the extent applicable, the gain or loss on dilution of our ownership interest as a result of the capital contributions into GF by ATIC.
Stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units for the years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 was allocated in our consolidated statements of operations as follows: Total stock-based compensation expense, net of tax of $0 During 2012, 2011 and 2010, we did not realize any excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation and therefore we did not record any related financing cash flows.
Stock-based compensation expense of $97 million in 2012 increased by $7 million as compared to $90 million in 2011.
The increase was primarily due to the additional expense related to the equity grants made in connection with our acquisition of SeaMicro and an increase in the number of employee stock options and restricted stock units that we granted, partially offset by the absence of a charge related to the acceleration of vesting of all unvested equity incentive awards held by our former Chief Executive Officer in the first quarter of 2011 as a result of his resignation from AMD, effective January 10, 2011 and a lower weighted-average estimated grant date fair value in 2012 as compared to 2011.
Stock-based compensation expenses of $90 million in 2011 increased $3 million compared to $87 million in 2010.
This increase was primarily due to the acceleration of vesting of all unvested equity awards held by our former Chief Executive Officer in the first quarter of 2011 as a result of his resignation from AMD, effective January 10, 2011, and an increase in the number of employee stock options and restricted stock units that we granted in 2011 compared to 2010, partially offset by a lower weighted-average estimated grant date fair value in 2011 as compared to 2010.
As of December 29, 2012, we had $44 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to stock options that will be recognized over the weighted-average period of 2.20 years.
Also, as of December 29, 2012, we had $97 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, related to restricted stock and restricted stock units that will be recognized over the weighted-average period of 1.97 years.
International sales as a percentage of net revenue were 92% in 2012, 93% in 2011, and 88% in 2010.
We expect that international sales will continue to be a significant portion of total sales in the foreseeable future.
Substantially all of our sales transactions were denominated in As of December 29, 2012, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1.0 billion decreased by $763 million compared to cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1.8 billion as of December 31, 2011.
During 2012, we made net cash payments of $281 million to acquire SeaMicro, $250 million related to the limited waiver of exclusively from GF, $105 million related to restructuring activities and $80 million related to GF’s waiver of a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
The percentage of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held in the United States was 94% as of December 29, 2012.
During 2012, we invested an additional $32 million in long-term marketable securities, which we intend to hold for more than one year and do not intend to use in current operations.
Our long-term marketable securities are invested in corporate bonds and money market funds that have maximum stated maturities of 2 years.
As of December 29, 2012, the fair value of these long-term marketable securities was $181 million.
All of the long-term marketable securities were held in the United States.
As of December 29, 2012, our debt and capital lease obligations were $2.04 billion, which reflects a debt discount adjustment of $60 million on our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Senior Notes due 2017 (8.125% Notes).
In the third quarter of 2012, we repaid in full the outstanding principal and accrued interest on our 5.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2012 (5.75% Notes), of approximately $499 million, and issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 7.50% Senior Notes due 2022 (7.50% Notes).
For 2012, our net cash used in operating activities was $338 million and our non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow was negative $471 million.
Adjusted free cash flow is a non-GAAP measure, which we calculated in 2012 by taking GAAP net cash used in operating activities of $338 million for 2012 and subtracting capital expenditures, which were $133 million for 2012.
For 2011, net cash provided by operating activities was $382 million and our non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow was $528 million.
For 2011, we calculated non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow by taking GAAP net cash provided by operating activities of $382 million for 2011 and adding $396 million, which represented payments made by certain of our distributor customers during 2011 to IBM Credit LLC and certain of its subsidiaries (collectively, the IBM Parties) pursuant to our former accounts receivable financing arrangement, which we describe in further detail below.
Then we adjusted the resulting amount of $778 million by subtracting capital expenditures, which were $250 million for 2011.
Compared to our non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow of $528 million for 2011, the decrease in our non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow for 2012 was primarily due to the fact that we did not generate cash flow from operating activities in 2012; instead we used $338 million of net cash for operating activities.
The decrease was partially offset by a $117 million decrease in capital expenditures.
We had various supplier agreements with the IBM Parties pursuant to which we sold invoices of selected distributor customers.
Under this financing arrangement, we did not recognize revenue until our distributors sold our products to their customers.
Under GAAP, we classified funds received from the IBM Parties as debt on the balance sheet.
Moreover, for cash flow purposes, we classified these funds as cash flows from financing activities.
When a distributor paid the applicable IBM Party, we reduced the distributor’s accounts receivable and the corresponding debt resulted in a non-cash accounting entry.
Because we did not receive the cash from the distributor to reduce the accounts receivable, the distributor’s payment was not reflected in our cash flows from operating activities.
Generally, under GAAP, the reduction in accounts receivable is assumed to be a source of operating cash flow.
Therefore, we believe that treating the payments from our distributor customers to the IBM Parties as if we actually received the cash from the distributor and then used that cash to pay down the debt to the IBM Parties was more reflective of the economic substance of the financing arrangement with the IBM Parties.
We terminated our financing arrangement with the IBM Parties in February 2011.
Commencing in the third quarter of 2011, we no longer make the adjustment for distributors’ payments to the IBM Parties to our GAAP net cash provided by (used in) operating activities when calculating our non-GAAP adjusted free cash flow.
We calculate and communicate adjusted free cash flow because our management believes it is important for investors to understand the nature of these cash flows.
Our calculation of adjusted free cash flow may or may not be consistent with the calculation of this measure by other companies in the same industry.
Investors should not view adjusted free cash flow as an alternative to GAAP liquidity measures of cash flows from operating or financing activities.
We believe that the challenging macroeconomic conditions that we experienced in the second half of 2012 will continue during the first half of 2013.
In light of the macroeconomic environment, in the fourth quarter of 2012, we implemented a restructuring plan to reduce our operating expenses and better position us competitively.
With our restructuring and available external financing, we believe our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance will be sufficient to fund operations, including capital expenditures over the next twelve months.
We believe that in the event we decide to obtain external funding, we will be able to access the capital markets on terms and in amounts adequate to meet our objectives.
However, given the possibility of changes in market conditions or other occurrences, we cannot be certain that such funding will be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
Over the longer term, should additional funding be required, such as to meet payment obligations of our long-term debt when due, we may need to raise the required funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities, which may be issued from time to time under an effective registration statement, through the issuance of securities in a transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, or a combination of one or more of the foregoing.
We cannot assure you that macroeconomic conditions will improve, and they could worsen.
If market conditions do not improve or deteriorate, we may be limited in our ability to access the capital markets to meet liquidity needs on favorable terms or at all, which could adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition, including our ability to refinance maturing liabilities.
As a result of the uncertainties in the credit markets, all of our auction rate securities (ARS) were negatively affected, and since February 2008, auctions for these securities failed to settle on their respective settlement dates.
However, there have been no defaults, and we have received all interest payments as they became due.
During 2012, we did not realize any gain or loss on sales of available-for-sale securities of approximately $6 million, and we recorded an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $4 million during the fourth quarter.
As of December 29, 2012, the par value of our ARS was $37 million, with an estimated fair value of $28 million.
Total ARS, at fair value, represented 3% of our total investment portfolio as of December 29, 2012.
Based on the recent tender and redemption activities and the fact that the secondary market for these securities has become more liquid, with pricing generally similar to our carrying value, we classified these securities as marketable securities as of December 29, 2012.
We have the intent and believe we have the ability to sell these securities within the next 12 months.
During the first quarter to date, we sold $13 million of our ARS for an insignificant loss.
Net cash used in operating activities was $338 million in 2012.
A net loss of $1,183 million was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of a $278 million charge related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, $260 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $97 million of stock-based compensation expense and $23 million of non-cash interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and 8.125% Notes.
These charges were partially offset by a benefit of $40 million for deferred income taxes.
The net changes in operating assets as of December 29, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 included a decrease in accounts receivable of $290 million and an increase in inventories of $83 million, which were primarily due to lower sales during 2012.
During 2012, our payable to GF, which included all amounts that we owe to GF, increased by $277 million.
The increase was due to cash obligations of $240 million related to the third amendment to the WSA and $175 million related to the limited waiver of exclusivity from GF, offset by a decrease of $138 million in the amount of billings related to wafer purchases.
Accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other decreased by $232 million primarily due to a $94 million decrease in accrued liabilities, a $92 million decrease in accounts payable and other current liabilities, a $23 million decrease in other liabilities, a $15 million decrease in deferred income on shipments to distributors and a $6 million decrease in accrued compensation and benefits.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $382 million in 2011.
Net income of $491 million was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of $317 million of depreciation and amortization expense, a $209 million impairment charge on our investment in GF, $90 million of stock based compensation expense, and $21 million of non-cash interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and our 8.125% Notes.
These charges were partially offset by recognition of a non-cash gain of $492 million due to the dilution of our equity interest in GF.
The net changes in operating assets at December 31, 2011 compared to December 25, 2010 included an increase in accounts receivable of $347 million, which included the non-cash impact of our previous financing arrangements with the IBM Parties.
During 2011, the IBM Parties collected approximately $396 million from our distributor customers pursuant to these arrangements.
Without considering the collection by the IBM Parties of the accounts receivables that we sold to them, our accounts receivable decreased $49 million.
This decrease was primarily due to timing of sales and collections during 2011.
There was also a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $115 million primarily due to the receipt of the final settlement payment from Samsung of $117 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $412 million in 2010.
Net income of $471 million was adjusted for non-cash charges consisting primarily of a $462 million loss from the application of the equity method of accounting for our investment in GF, $383 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $87 million of stock-based compensation expense, $30 million of interest expense related to our 6.00% Notes and our 8.125% Notes and a $24 million net loss related to our repurchase of an aggregate of $1,016 million principal amount of our 6.00% Notes for $1,011 million in cash.
These charges were partially offset by a non-cash gain of $325 million related to the deconsolidation of GF, amortization of foreign grants of $16 million and a net gain of $17 million from the sale of marketable securities.
The net changes in operating assets at December 25, 2010 compared to December 26, 2009 included an increase in accounts receivable of $1,138 million, which included the non-cash impact of our financing arrangement with the IBM Parties.
During 2010, the IBM Parties collected approximately $915 million from our distributor customers pursuant to these arrangements.
Without considering the collection by the IBM Parties of the accounts receivables that we sold to them, our accounts receivable increased $223 million.
This increase was primarily due to the introduction and sale of new products towards the end of 2010 and the timing of the related collections.
Excluding the effects of the deconsolidation of GF, there was also a decrease in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other of $184 million, primarily due to the timing of payments.
Accounts payable to GF increased by $55 million due to the timing of payments during 2010.
Net cash used in investing activities was $19 million in 2012.
We had a net cash inflow of $404 million from purchase, sale and maturity of available-for-sale securities, partially offset by a net cash outflow of $281 million related to the acquisition of SeaMicro, a cash outflow of $133 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment and a cash outflow of $9 million related to other investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $113 million in 2011.
We had a net cash outflow of $234 million for the purchase and sale of property, plant and equipment, and payments of $17 million for professional services related to the contribution of GFS to GF.
The net cash outflows were partially offset by a net cash inflow of $140 million from purchase, sale, and maturity of available-for-sale securities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,123 million in 2010.
The cash flow effect of the deconsolidation of GF was an outflow of $904 million, which consisted of GF’s cash and cash equivalents.
In addition, we had a net cash outflow of $147 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment and of $160 million for purchases of available-for-sale securities.
The net cash outflows were partially offset by a net cash inflow of $69 million from the sale of trading securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $37 million in 2012 primarily due to net proceeds from the issuance of our 7.50% Notes of $491 million, $23 million from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities and $14 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan, partially offset by our repayment of outstanding principal and accrued interest on our 5.75% Notes and repayment of capital lease obligations of $489 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $6 million in 2011 as a result of payments of $202 million to repurchase $200 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
This amount was partially offset by $170 million of proceeds from our former financing arrangement with the IBM Parties, $20 million in proceeds from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our AMD APU products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities, and $18 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $484 million in 2010 primarily as a result of proceeds of $988 million from our former financing arrangement with the IBM Parties, $490 million from the sale and issuance of $500 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.75% Notes, $19 million in proceeds from foreign grants from the Canadian government for research and development activities related to our Fusion products and from the Malaysian and Chinese governments for our local microprocessor assembly, test and packaging facilities and $15 million from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based compensation plan.
These amounts were partially offset by payments of $1,011 million to repurchase $1,016 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes.
During 2012, 2011 and 2010, we did not realize any excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
Therefore, we did not record any related financing cash flows for these periods.
The following table summarizes our consolidated principal contractual cash obligations, as of December 29, 2012, and is supplemented by the discussion following the table: Represents aggregate principal amount of the notes, without the effect of associated discounts.
Represents estimated aggregate interest obligations for our outstanding debt obligations that are payable in cash, excluding capital lease obligations.
Also excludes non-cash amortization of debt discounts on the 8.125% Notes and the 6.00% Notes.
We have purchase obligations for goods and services where payments are based, in part, on the volume or type of services we acquire.
In those cases, we only included the minimum volume of purchase obligations in the table above.
Purchase orders for goods and services that are cancelable upon notice and without significant penalties are not included in the amounts above.
This amount includes all our contractual obligations to GF.
On April 27, 2007, we issued $2.2 billion aggregate principal amount of 6.00% Notes.
The 6.00% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year beginning November 1, 2007 until the maturity date of May 1, 2015.
The terms of the 6.00% Notes are governed by an indenture (the 6.00% Indenture) dated April 27, 2007, by and between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
As of December 29, 2012, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 6.00% Notes was $580 million and the remaining carrying value was approximately $555 million, net of debt discount of $25 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” below, for additional information regarding the 6.00% Notes.
On November 30, 2009, we issued $500 million of the 8.125% Notes at a discount of 10.204%.
The 8.125% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on June 15 and December 15 of each year beginning June 15, 2010 until the maturity date of December 15, 2017.
The discount of $51 million is recorded as contra debt and is amortized to interest expense over the life of the 8.125% Notes using the effective interest method.
The 8.125% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 8.125% Indenture) dated November 30, 2009 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
From December 15, 2013, we may redeem the 8.125% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on December 15, 2013 through December 14, 2014 104.063% Beginning on December 15, 2014 through December 14, 2015 102.031% As of December 29, 2012, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 8.125% Notes was $500 million and the remaining carrying value was approximately $464 million, net of debt discount of $36 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding the 8.125% Notes.
On August 4, 2010, we issued $500 million of the 7.75% Notes.
The 7.75% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 1 and August 1 of each year beginning February 1, 2011 until the maturity date of August 1, 2020.
The 7.75% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 7.75% Indenture) dated August 4, 2010 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
From August 1, 2015, we may redeem the 7.75% Notes for cash at the following specified prices plus accrued and unpaid interest: Beginning on August 1, 2015 through July 31, 2016                                                                                          103.875% Beginning on August 1, 2016 through July 31, 2017                                                                                          102.583% Beginning on August 1, 2017 through July 31, 2018                                                                                          101.292% As of December 29, 2012, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.75% Notes was $500 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” below, for additional information regarding the 7.75% Notes.
On August 15, 2012, we issued $500 million of 7.50% Senior Notes due 2022.
The 7.50% Notes are our general unsecured senior obligations.
Interest is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year beginning February 15, 2013 until the maturity date of August 15, 2022.
The 7.50% Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture (the 7.50% Indenture) dated August 15, 2012 between us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
As of December 29, 2012, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our 7.50% Notes was $500 million.
See Note 10 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” below, for additional information regarding the 7.50% Notes.
We may elect to purchase or otherwise retire the balance of the 6.00% Notes, 8.125% Notes, 7.75% Notes and 7.50% Notes with cash, stock or other assets from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, either directly or through intermediaries, or by tender offer when we believe the market conditions are favorable to do so.
The agreements governing our 6.00% Notes, 8.125% Notes, 7.75% Notes and 7.50% Notes contain cross-default provisions whereby a default under one agreement would likely result in cross defaults under agreements covering other borrowings.
The occurrence of a default under any of these borrowing arrangements would permit the applicable note holders to declare all amounts outstanding under those borrowing arrangements to be immediately due and payable.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above include primarily $9 million of payments due under certain software and technology licenses that will be paid through 2014.
Other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above exclude amounts recorded on our consolidated balance sheet that do not require us to make cash payments, which, as of December 29, 2012, primarily consisted of $13 million of deferred gains resulting from the sale and leaseback of certain of our facilities.
Also excluded from other long-term liabilities in the contractual obligations table above was $2 million of non-current unrecognized tax benefits, which are included in the caption “Other long-term liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheet at December 29, 2012.
This amount represents a potential cash payment that could be payable by us upon settlement with a taxing authority.
We have not included this amount in the contractual obligations table above because we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate regarding the timing of any settlement with the taxing authority, if any.
As of December 29, 2012, we had aggregate outstanding capital lease obligations of $23 million for one of our facilities in Canada, which is payable in monthly installments through 2017.
We lease certain of our facilities and in some jurisdictions.
We lease the land on which these facilities are built, under non-cancelable lease agreements that expire at various dates through 2022.
We lease certain manufacturing and office equipment for terms ranging from 1 to 5 years.
Total future non-cancelable lease obligations as of December 29, 2012 were $160 million.
Our purchase obligations primarily include our obligations to purchase wafers and substrates from third parties, excluding our wafer purchase commitments to GF under the WSA.
As of December 29, 2012, total non-cancelable purchase obligations were $299 million.
Obligations to GF represents all our contractual obligations to GF, including approximately $1.15 billion of our wafer purchase commitments for 2013 and $250 million for the first quarter of 2014 and other payables under the WSA as described below.
Under the second amendment to the WSA, GF granted us certain rights to contract with another wafer foundry supplier with respect to specified products for a specified period.
In consideration for these rights, we agreed to pay GF $425 million and transfer to GF all of the capital stock of GF that we owned, directly or indirectly.
Of the $425 million, we paid $250 million as of December 29, 2012.
The remaining payment of $175 million was paid on December 31, 2012.
As security for a portion of the payment, we issued a $225 million promissory note to GF.
As of December 29, 2012, the outstanding balance under this promissory note was $175 million.
We paid all the amounts due for the partial waiver of exclusivity.
Accordingly, this promissory note is no longer outstanding.
Under the third amendment to the WSA, GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration of this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
Of the $320 million fee, we paid $80 million as of December 29, 2012.
The remaining payments are $40 million by April 1, 2013 and $200 million by December 31, 2013.
As security for the final payment, we issued a $200 million promissory note to GF.
As of December 29, 2012, the outstanding balance under this promissory note was $200 million.
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment portfolio and long-term debt.
We usually invest our cash in investments with short maturities or with frequent interest reset terms.
Accordingly, our interest income fluctuates with short-term market conditions.
As of December 29, 2012, our investment portfolio consisted primarily of time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, ARS, and corporate bonds.
With the exception of our ARS, these investments were highly liquid.
Due to the relatively short, weighted-average maturity of our investment portfolio and the current low interest rate environment, our exposure to interest rate risk is minimal.
As of December 29, 2012, all of our outstanding debt had fixed interest rates.
Consequently, our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates on reported interest expense and corresponding cash flows is minimal.
We will continue to monitor our exposure to interest rate risk.
We mitigate default risk in our investment portfolio by investing in only high credit quality securities and by constantly positioning our portfolio to respond to a significant reduction in a credit rating of any investment issuer or guarantor.
Our portfolio includes investments in debt and marketable equity securities with active secondary or resale markets to ensure portfolio liquidity.
We are averse to principal loss and strive to preserve our invested funds by limiting default risk and market risk.
We actively monitor market conditions and developments specific to the securities and security classes in which we invest.
We believe that we take a conservative approach to investing our funds in that we invest only in highly-rated debt securities with relatively short maturities and do not invest in securities we believe involve a higher degree of risk.
As of December 29, 2012, substantially all of our investments in debt securities were A rated by at least one of the rating agencies.
While we believe we take prudent measures to mitigate investment related risks, such risks cannot be fully eliminated as there are circumstances outside of our control.
As a result of the uncertainties in the credit markets, all of our ARS were negatively affected and auctions for these securities failed to settle on their respective settlement dates since February 2008.
As of December 29, 2012, the par value of our ARS was $37 million, with an estimated fair value of $28 million.
See “Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in this report for further information.
The following table presents the cost basis, fair value and related weighted-average interest rates by year of maturity for our investment portfolio and debt obligations as of December 29, 2012: Foreign Exchange Risk.
As a result of our foreign operations, we incur costs and we carry assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the Canadian dollar, while sales of products are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars.
We maintain a foreign currency hedging strategy, which uses derivative financial instruments to mitigate the risks associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
This strategy takes into consideration all of our exposures.
We do not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
In applying our strategy, from time to time, we use foreign currency forward contracts to hedge certain forecasted expenses denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the Canadian dollar.
We designate these contracts as cash flow hedges of forecasted expenses, to the extent eligible under the accounting rules, and evaluate hedge effectiveness prospectively and retrospectively.
As such, the effective portion of the gain or loss on these contracts is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and reclassified to earnings in the same line item as the associated forecasted transaction and in the same period during which the hedged transaction affects earnings.
Any ineffective portion is immediately recorded in earnings.
During the first quarter of 2011, we reassessed our hedging needs related to our Euro foreign exchange contracts and liquidated our Euro currency forward contracts.
As a result, during 2011, we recorded a gain of $6 million in other income (expense), net, in our consolidated statement of operations.
We may economically hedge any material Euro exposure by entering into Euro currency forward contracts we identify in the future.
We also use, from time to time, foreign currency forward contracts to economically hedge recognized foreign currency exposures on the balance sheets of various subsidiaries, primarily those denominated in Canadian dollars.
We do not designate these forward contracts as hedging instruments.
Accordingly, the gain or loss associated with these contracts is immediately recorded in earnings.
The statements in this report include forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations.
These forward- looking statements should not be relied upon as predictions of future events as we cannot assure you that the events or circumstances reflected in these statements will be achieved or will occur.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward-looking terminology including “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “pro forma,” “estimates,” or “anticipates” or the negative of these words and phrases or other variations of these words and phrases or comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements relate to, among other things:demand for our products; the timing of new product releases and technology transitions; the growth and competitive landscape of the markets in which we participate; the nature and extent of our future payments to GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF) under the wafer supply agreement (WSA) and the materiality of these payments; manufacturing yields at GF and constrained supply of products from GF; the 2011 restructuring plan, including the timing of actions in connection with the plan and anticipated restructuring charges, cash expenditures, operational savings, and our intention to use these savings to fund certain strategic initiatives; the level of international sales as compared to total sales; the availability of external financing; our ability to sell our auction rate securities in the next twelve months; that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and anticipated cash flow from operations and available external financing will be sufficient to fund our operations over the next twelve months; our dependence on a small number of customers; our hedging strategy; the continued shortage of hard disk drives as a result of the floods in Thailand; and the adequacy of our existing facilities for our present purpose.
Material factors and assumptions that were applied in making these forward-looking statements include, without limitation, the following: the expected rate of market growth and demand for our products and technologies (and the mix thereof); manufacturing yields and wafer volumes from our third-party wafer foundry suppliers; our expected market share; our expected product costs and average selling price; our overall competitive position and the competitiveness of our current and future products; our ability to introduce new products, consistent with our current roadmap; our ability to raise sufficient capital on favorable terms; our ability to make additional investment in research and development and that such opportunities will be available; our ability to realize the anticipated benefits of our fabless business model; the expected demand for computers; and the state of credit markets and macroeconomic conditions.
Material factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, without limitation, the following: that Intel Corporation’s pricing, marketing and rebating programs, product bundling, standard setting, new product introductions or other activities may negatively impact our plans; that we may be unable to develop, launch and ramp new products and technologies in the volumes that are required by the market at mature yields on a timely basis; that our third party wafer foundry suppliers will be unable to transition our products to advanced manufacturing process technologies in a timely and effective way or to manufacture our products on a timely basis in sufficient quantities and using competitive process technologies; that we will be unable to obtain sufficient manufacturing capacity or components to meet demand for our products or will not fully utilize our projected manufacturing capacity needs at GFs microprocessor manufacturing facilities in 2012 and beyond; that customers stop buying our products or materially reduce their operations or demand for our products; that we may be unable to maintain the level of investment in research and development that is required to remain competitive; that there may be unexpected variations in market growth and demand for our products and technologies in light of the product mix that we may have available at any particular time or a decline in demand; that we will require additional funding and may be unable to raise sufficient capital on favorable terms, or at all; that global business and economic conditions will not improve or will worsen; that demand for computers will be lower than currently expected; and the effect of political or economic instability, domestically or internationally, on our sales or supply chain.
For a discussion of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, see “Part I, Item 1A—Risk Factors” and the “Financial Condition” section set forth in “Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A, beginning on page 30 below and such other risks and uncertainties as set forth below in this report or detailed in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports and filings.
We assume no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
We are a global semiconductor company with facilities around the world.
Within the global semiconductor industry, we offer primarily: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an accelerated processing unit, for the commercial and consumer markets, embedded microprocessors for commercial, commercial client and consumer markets and chipsets for desktop and mobile devices, including mobile personal computers, or PCs, and tablets, professional workstations and servers; and graphics, video and multimedia products for desktop and mobile devices, including mobile PCs and tablets, home media PCs and professional workstations, servers and technology for game consoles.
For financial information about geographic areas and for segment information with respect to revenues and operating results, refer to the information set forth in Note 13 of our consolidated financial statements, beginning on page 86 below.
We were incorporated under the laws of Delaware on May 1, 1969 and became a publicly held company in 1972.
Since 1979 our common stock has been listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “AMD.” Our mailing address and executive offices are located at One AMD Place, Sunnyvale, California 94088, and our telephone number is (408) 749-4000.
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, ATI, the ATI logo, AMD Athlon, AMD Opteron, AMD Phenom, AMD Sempron, AMD Turion, FirePro, FireStream, CrossFire, Radeon, and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Microsoft, Windows, and DirectX are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other jurisdictions.
HyperTransport is a licensed trademark of the HyperTransport Technology Consortium.
Other names are for informational purposes only and are used to identify companies and products and may be trademarks of their respective owners.
We post on the Investor Relations pages of our Web site, www.amd.com, a link to our filings with the SEC, our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Ethics for our Executive Officers and all other senior finance executives, our “Worldwide Standards of Business Conduct,” which applies to our Board of Directors and all of our employees, and the charters of our Audit and Finance, Compensation and Nominating and Corporate Governance committees of our Board of Directors.
Our filings with the SEC are posted as soon as reasonably practical after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
You can also obtain copies of these documents by writing to us at: Corporate Secretary, AMD, 7171 Southwest Parkway, M/S 100, Austin, Texas 78735, or emailing us at: Corporate.Secretary@amd.com.
All of these documents and filings are available free of charge.
If we make substantive amendments to our Code of Ethics, or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions, we intend to disclose the nature of such amendment or waiver on our Web site or in a Current Report on Form 8-K in accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
Please note that information contained on our Web site is not incorporated by reference in, or considered to be a part of, this report.
Semiconductors are components used in a variety of electronic products and systems.
An integrated circuit, or IC, is a semiconductor device that consists of many interconnected transistors on a single chip.
Since the invention of the transistor in 1948, improvements in IC process and design technologies have led to the development of smaller, more complex and more reliable ICs at a lower cost per function.
In order to satisfy the demand for faster, smaller and lower-cost ICs, semiconductor companies have continually developed improvements in manufacturing and process technology and design.
ICs are increasingly being manufactured using smaller geometries on larger silicon wafers.
Use of smaller process geometries can result in products that are higher performing, use less power and cost less to manufacture on a per unit basis.
A microprocessor is an IC that serves as the central processing unit, or CPU, of a computer.
It generally consists of millions of transistors that process data and control other devices in the system, acting as the brain of the computer.
The performance of a microprocessor is a critical factor impacting the performance of a computer and numerous other electronic systems.
The principal indicators of CPU performance are work-per-cycle, or how many instructions are executed per cycle, clock speed, representing the rate at which a CPUs internal logic operates, measured in units of hertz, or cycles per second, and power consumption.
Other factors impacting microprocessor performance include the number of CPUs, or cores, on a microprocessor, the bit rating of the microprocessor, memory size and data access speed.
Developments in circuit design and manufacturing process technologies have resulted in significant advances in microprocessor performance.
Currently, microprocessors are designed to process 32-bits or 64-bits of information at one time.
The bit rating of a microprocessor generally denotes the largest size of numerical data that a microprocessor can handle.
Microprocessors with 64-bit processing capabilities enable systems to have greater performance by allowing software applications and operating systems to access more memory.
Moreover, as businesses and consumers require greater performance from their computer systems due to the growth of digital data and increasingly sophisticated software applications, semiconductor companies are designing and developing multi-core microprocessors, where multiple processor cores are placed on a single die or in a single processor.
Multi-core microprocessors offer enhanced overall system performance and efficiency because computing tasks can be spread across two or more processing cores each of which can execute a task at full speed.
Moreover, multiple processor cores packaged together can increase performance of a computer system without greatly increasing the total amount of power consumed and the total amount of heat emitted.
This type of “symmetrical multiprocessing” is effective in both multi- tasking environments where multiple cores can enable operating systems to prioritize and manage tasks from multiple software applications simultaneously and also for “multi-threaded” software applications where multiple cores can process different parts of the software program, or “threads,” simultaneously thereby enhancing performance of the application.
Businesses and consumers also require computer systems with improved power management technology, which allows them to reduce the power consumption of their computer systems thereby reducing the total cost of ownership.
While general purpose computer architectures based on the x86 architecture are sufficient for many customers, we believe that an architecture that optimizes the use of a CPU and graphics processing unit, or GPU, for a given workload can provide a substantial improvement in user experience, performance and energy efficiency.
As the volume of digital media increases, we believe many customers can benefit from an accelerated computing architecture.
An accelerated computing architecture enables “offloading” of selected tasks, thereby optimizing the use of multiple computational units such as the CPU and GPU, depending on the application or workload.
For example, serial workloads are better suited for CPUs, while highly parallel tasks may be better performed by a GPU.
Our AMD Accelerated Processing Unit, or APU, combines our CPU and GPU onto a single piece of silicon.
We believe that high performance computing workloads, workloads that are visual in nature and even traditional applications such as photo and video editing or other multi-media applications can benefit from our accelerated computing architecture.
We currently design, develop and sell microprocessor products for servers, desktop PCs and mobile devices, including mobile PCs and tablets.
Our microprocessors and chipsets are incorporated into computing platforms that also include GPUs and core software to enable and advance the computing components.
A platform is a collection of technologies that are designed to work together to provide a more complete computing solution.
We believe that integrated, balanced platforms consisting of microprocessors, chipsets and GPUs that work together at the system level bring end users improved system stability, increased performance and enhanced power efficiency.
Furthermore, by combining all of these elements onto a single piece of silicon as an APU, we believe system performance and power efficiency is further improved.
In addition to the enhancements at the end-user level, our customers also benefit from an all-AMD platform, as we are able to provide them with a single point of contact for the key platform components and enable them to bring the platforms to market faster in a variety of client and server system form factors.
Our CPUs and APUs are manufactured primarily using 45-nanometer (nm), 40nm, and 32nm process technology.
We currently base our microprocessors and chipsets on the x86 instruction set architecture and AMD’s Direct Connect Architecture, which connects an on-chip memory controller and input/output, or I/O, channels directly to one or more microprocessor cores.
We typically integrate two or more processor cores onto a single die, and each core has its own dedicated cache, which is memory that is located on the semiconductor die, permitting quicker access to frequently used data and instructions.
Some of our microprocessors have additional levels of cache such as L2, or second level cache, and L3, or third level cache, to enable faster data access and higher performance.
Energy efficiency and power consumption continue to be key design principles for our products.
We focus on continually improving power management technology, or “performance-per-watt.” To that end, we offer CPUs, APUs and chipsets with features that we have designed to reduce system level energy consumption, with multiple levels of lower clock speed and voltage states that reduce processor power consumption during idle times.
We design our CPUs and APUs to be compatible with operating system software such as the Microsoft® Windows® family of operating systems, Linux®, NetWare®, Solaris and UNIX.
Our CPUs and chipsets support multiple generations of HyperTransport™ technology, which is a high-bandwidth communications interface that enables higher levels of multi-processor performance and scalability over traditional front side bus-based microprocessor technology.
Our AMD family of APUs represents a new approach to processor design and software development, delivering serial, parallel and visual compute capabilities for HD video, 3D and data-intensive workloads in the APU.
APUs combine high-performance serial and parallel processing cores with other special-purpose hardware accelerators.
We design our APUs for improved visual computing, security, performance- per-watt and smaller device form factors.
Having the CPU and GPU on the same chip reduces the system power and bill-of-materials, speeds the flow of data between the CPU and GPU through shared memory and allows the GPU to function as both a graphic engine and an application accelerator in high efficient compute platforms.
Building on the integration of our CPU and GPU onto a single piece of silicon, we are focused on evolving our accelerated computing architecture in such a manner so that software programmers see a single multi-purpose processing unit.
Heterogeneous Systems Architecture describes our overarching design for having combinations of CPU and GPU processor cores operate as a unified engine that we intend to be both higher performance and lower power than our previous architectures.
In November 2011, we launched the AMD Opteron™ 6200 series processor, codenamed “Interlagos,” and AMD Opteron 4200 series processor, codenamed “Valencia,” our latest generation of microprocessors for server platforms that consist of 8-, 12- and 16-core versions and are based on our x86 “Bulldozer” architecture.
These new processors are designed to specifically enhance the scalability of enterprise applications while enabling Web and database center customers to better handle emerging cloud and virtualization workloads.
Virtualization is the use of software to allow multiple discrete operating systems and application environments (i.e., multiple virtual servers) to share a single physical computer.
By enabling multiple operating systems and applications to run on the same server, virtualization offers the benefit of consolidating workloads and reducing hardware requirements, which can also reduce power, cooling and system management costs.
We designed the AMD Opteron 6200 series processor to handle multi-threaded workloads, such as cloud computing, virtualization, HPC, databases and business application.
We designed the AMD Opteron 4200 series processor to handle demanding server workloads at the lowest possible energy consumption, which we believe is well suited for power-conscious cloud deployments and for IT infrastructure and collaboration.
In February 2011, we introduced five new members of the AMD Opteron 6100 Series platform designed to address the demand for low- power, balanced systems for small and medium businesses and increased performance-per-dollar-per-watt for enterprise and public sector environments.
Our CPUs for mobile PC platforms consist of the AMD Phenom™ II Dual-Core Mobile Processor, AMD Phenom II Triple-Core, AMD Phenom II Quad-Core Mobile Processor, AMD Turion™ X2 Mobile Processor, AMD Turion II Mobile Processor, AMD Turion II Ultra Mobile Processor, AMD Turion Neo X2 Mobile Processor, AMD Athlon™ II processor, AMD Athlon II Neo processor, AMD Athlon Neo X2 Dual-Core processor and the Mobile AMD Sempron™ processor.
Typically, our embedded products are used in applications that require high to moderate levels of performance where key features include low cost, mobility, low power and small form factor.
High performance graphics are increasingly important in many embedded systems.
Customers of our embedded products include vendors in industrial controls, digital signage, point of sale/self-service kiosks, medical imaging, set-top box and casino gaming machines as well as enterprise class telecommunications, networking, security, storage systems and thin-clients, or computers that serve as an access device on a network.
The embedded market has moved from developing proprietary, custom designs to leveraging the industry-standard x86 instruction set architecture as a way to reduce costs and speed time to market.
Customer requirements for these systems include: very low power for small enclosures and 24x7 operation, support for Linux, Windows and other operating systems, and high-performance for increasingly sophisticated applications.
Other requirements include advanced specifications for industrial temperatures, shock and vibration, and reliability.
Our embedded platforms include options from the AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon, AMD Turion, and AMD Sempron processor families; the AMD Embedded G-Series, which is the embedded version of our APUs; the AMD Radeon™ graphics processor family; and numerous AMD chipsets.
These products are part of the AMD Longevity Program, which provides for an availability period of up to five years in some cases in order to support lengthy development and qualification cycles and long-term life of the system in the market.
In May 2011, we announced two additional AMD Embedded G-Series APUs.
These low-power processors are designed for compact, fanless embedded systems like digital signage, kiosks, and mobile industrial devices.
Also in May 2011, we introduced the AMD Radeon E6760 embedded discrete graphics processor, which offers embedded system designers the combination of OpenCL™, and AMD Eyefinity- enhanced support.
OpenCL, or Open Computing Language, is the programming standard for general-purpose computations on systems that use more than one kind of processor, such as an APU.
AMD Eyefinity is a technology that allows a game to be played across multiple screens in a panoramic view with minimal distortion by allowing up to six monitors to be connected to one graphics processor.
Chipsets send data between the microprocessor and input, display and storage devices, such as the keyboard, mouse, monitor, hard drive and CD or DVD drive.
Chipsets perform essential logic functions, such as balancing the performance of the system and removing bottlenecks.
Chipsets also extend the graphics, audio, video and other capabilities of computer systems.
All desktop and mobile PCs as well as servers incorporate a chipset.
In many PCs, the chipset is integrated with additional functions such as a GPU.
An integrated chipset solution is commonly known as an integrated graphics processor, or IGP, chipset.
Chipsets that do not integrate a graphics core are connected to what is known as a discrete GPU.
IGP chipsets offer a lower cost solution and in some circumstances can offer reduced power consumption or smaller system form factors.
A majority of PCs make use of IGP chipsets, while discrete GPUs are used in higher performance PCs and servers.
Our APU architecture replaces an IGP-type chipset with an AMD Fusion Controller Hub chip which performs the input and output functions of the chipset.
We believe that the combination of an APU and the AMD Fusion Controller Hub will eventually replace our market for IGP chipsets.
In June 2011, we launched our 9-Series Chipsets designed to help our customers develop next generation high performance desktop platforms.
The primary product of a semiconductor graphics supplier is the GPU.
The GPU is specifically architected for high performance graphics processing, unlike the CPU.
In this way, a dedicated GPU and CPU work in tandem to increase overall speed and performance of the system.
A graphics solution can be in the form of either a discrete GPU, an integrated chipset, an embedded graphics processor or a combination of the discrete GPU and integrated/embedded solution working in tandem.
The semiconductor graphics market addresses the need for visual or parallel processing in various computing and entertainment platforms such as desktop PCs, mobile PCs and workstations.
Users of these products value a rich visual experience, particularly in the high-end enthusiast market where consumers often seek out the fastest and highest performing visual processing products to enable the most compelling and immersive gaming experiences.
Moreover, for many consumers, the PC is evolving from a traditional data and communications processing machine to an entertainment platform.
Visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key elements of product differentiation among various product platforms.
This has led to the increasing creation and use of processing intensive multimedia content for PCs and to PC manufacturers designing PCs for playing games, displaying photos and capturing TV and other multimedia content, viewing online videos, photo editing and managing digital content.
In turn, the trend has contributed to the development of higher performance graphics solutions.
Our customers generally use our graphics solutions to increase the speed of rendering images and to improve image resolution and color definition.
We develop our products for use in desktop and mobile PCs, professional workstations, servers and gaming consoles.
With each of our graphics products, we provide drivers and supporting software packages that enable the effective use of these products under a variety of operating systems and applications.
In addition, our recent generation graphics products have Linux® driver support.
Heavy computational workloads have traditionally been processed on a CPU, but we believe that the industry is shifting to a new computing paradigm that increasingly relies more on the GPU or a combination of GPU and CPU.
AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing or GPGPU (General Purpose GPU) refers to a set of advanced hardware and software technologies that enable AMD GPUs, working in concert with the computer system’s CPUs, to accelerate applications beyond traditional graphics and video processing by allowing the CPUs and GPUs to process information cooperatively.
Heterogeneous computing enables PCs and servers to run computationally-intensive tasks more efficiently, providing a superior application experience to the end user.
Our APU is a heterogeneous system that incorporates Microsoft® DirectX® 11 (DirectX 11) discrete level GPU capabilities for graphics processing and other mathematically intensive computations on very large data sets, to handle visual tasks such as 3D rendering as well as certain fixed functions.
The APU continues to utilize a CPU to run the operating system and most traditional PC applications.
With our APUs, we offer discrete level GPU performance at value and mainstream price points with the added benefit of long battery life in mobile PCs and lower power computing devices.
Additionally, a mainstream APU, when paired with an AMD discrete GPU, in multi-GPU configuration will enable greater graphics performance and parallel processing.
We believe that high performance computing workloads, workloads that are visual in nature and even traditional applications such as photo and video editing or other multi-media applications can benefit from our accelerated computing architecture.
We also provide graphics products for the server market, such as the AMD FirePro V7800P and the AMD Fire Pro V9800P, where we leverage our graphics expertise and align our offerings to provide the stability, video quality and bus architectures desired by our customers.
Through our ATI CrossFire Pro, we enable CAD and DCC professionals to connect two identical AMD FirePro 3D graphics cards with a flex cable connection that can enhance performance of geometry-limited applications.
In January 2011, we introduced AMD FirePro 2270 and ATI FirePro V5800 DVI, and in May 2011, we introduced AMD FirePro V5900 and AMD FirePro V7900, designed for professionals in the medical, financial, design and engineering fields who require the ability to view and interact with multiple applications simultaneously.
Also in May 2011, we launched AMD FirePro V7800P for server and data center environments.
In November 2011, we introduced AMD FirePro V4900 designed for DCC and CAD professionals at an entry-level price point.
Semiconductor graphics suppliers have leveraged their core visual and graphics processing technologies developed for the PC market by providing graphic solutions to game console manufacturers.
In this market, semiconductor graphics suppliers work alongside game console manufacturers to enhance the visual experience for users of sophisticated video games.
We leverage our core visual processing technology into the game console market by licensing customized GPUs for graphics in videogame consoles such as the Microsoft® Xbox 360™ and Nintendo Wii.
We sell our products through our direct sales force and through independent distributors and sales representatives in both domestic and international markets pursuant to non-exclusive agreements.
Our sales arrangements generally operate on the basis of product forecasts provided by the particular customer, but do not typically include any commitment or requirement for minimum product purchases.
We primarily use purchase orders, sales order acknowledgments and contractual agreements as evidence of our sales arrangements.
Our agreements typically contain standard terms and conditions covering matters such as payment terms, warranties and indemnities for issues specific to our products.
We generally warrant that our products sold to our customers will conform to our approved specifications and be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service for one year.
Subject to certain exceptions, we also offer a three-year limited warranty to end users for only those CPU and AMD A-Series APU products that are commonly referred to as “processors in a box” and for PC workstation products.
We have also offered extended limited warranties to certain customers of “tray” microprocessor products and/or workstation graphics products who have written agreements with us and target their computer systems at the commercial and/or embedded markets.
We market and sell our products under the AMD trademark.
Our desktop PC product brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series APU, AMD E-Series APU, AMD FX, AMD Phenom, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron.
Our mobile PC brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series APU, AMD E-Series APU, AMD C-Series APU, AMD Z-Series APU, AMD Phenom, AMD Turion, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron.
AMD Athlon processors and AMD Turion processors are sometimes marketed using the “Neo” model designator for low power products targeted at the thin-and-light mobile segment.
Our server brand for microprocessors is AMD Opteron.
We also sell low-power versions of our AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon, AMD Turion , AMD Sempron and AMD Embedded A-Series processors as embedded processor solutions.
Our product brand for the consumer graphics market is AMD Radeon.
Our product brand for professional graphics products is AMD FirePro.
We also market and sell our chipsets under the AMD trademark.
We launch or update new platforms for consumers in the desktop and mobile markets under our VISION Technology from AMD brand.
We designed VISION Technology to simplify the buying process for consumers by more clearly connecting our brand to the level of activities that consumers want to perform on the PC.
VISION Technology contains multiple levels of increasingly rich PC system capabilities to address the diverse needs of today’s PC users.
VISION Technology initially was comprised of four levels of PC system capabilities: VISION, VISION Premium, VISION Ultimate and VISION Black.
In January 2011, we introduced our VISION Technology brand for our low-power APU products, consisting of VISION E1 and VISION E2 for our entry level PCs.
In June 2011, we launched our VISION Technology brand for performance series APUs consisting of four levels of PC system capabilities: VISION A4, VISION A6, VISION A8, and VISION FX.
These VISION tiers are for 2011 and later systems powered by our APUs and provide increasingly higher PC capabilities.
VISION E1, E2, and A4 based desktops and notebooks are targeted at PC users who require basic digital media consumption such as watching DVDs, photo viewing, casual gaming, listening to music, and Internet browsing.
VISION A6 and A8 based desktops and notebooks are designed to allow a greater computing performance for digital consumption and creation.
These activities include watching HD movies, photo editing, DirectX 11 gaming, multi-tasking, and video editing.
VISION FX desktops are based on the AMD FX processor and an AMD Radeon HD 6000 or HD 7000 series graphics card.
These VISION FX systems are designed to enable the highest capabilities sought by enthusiasts and are only available on desktop PCs.
There is also VISION Pro Technology, which is designed for business users and extends the approach of VISION Technology to commercial PC platforms.
We market our products through our direct marketing and co-marketing programs.
In addition, we have cooperative advertising and marketing programs with customers or third parties, including market development programs, pursuant to which we may provide product information, training, marketing materials and funds.
Under our co-marketing development programs, eligible customers can use market development funds as partial reimbursement for advertisements and marketing programs related to our products, subject to meeting defined criteria.
Original Equipment Manufacturers, or OEMs, customers may qualify for market development funds based on purchases of eligible products.
Our microprocessor customers consist primarily of OEMs, original design manufacturers, or ODMs, system builders and independent distributors in both domestic and international markets.
ODMs provide design and/or manufacturing services to branded and unbranded private label resellers, OEMs and system builders.
Our graphics products customers include the foregoing as well as AIBs, or add-in-board manufacturers.
Customers of our chipset products consist primarily of PC and server OEMs, often through ODMs or other contract manufacturers who build the OEM motherboards, as well as desktop and server motherboard manufacturers who incorporate chipsets into their channel motherboards.
Our sales and marketing teams work closely with our customers to define product features, performance and timing of new products so that the products we are developing meet our customers’ needs.
We also employ application engineers to assist our customers in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products in order to assist in optimizing product compatibility.
We believe that our commitment to customer service and design support improves our customers’ time-to-market and fosters relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
We focus on three types of OEMs: multi-nationals, selected regional accounts and target market customers.
Large multi-nationals and regional accounts are our core OEM customers.
Our OEM customers include numerous foreign and domestic manufacturers of servers and workstations, desktop and mobile PCs, and PC motherboards.
In 2011, Hewlett-Packard Company accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated net revenues.
Sales to Hewlett-Packard consisted primarily of products from our Computing Solutions segment.
Five customers, including Hewlett-Packard, accounted for approximately 56% of the net revenue attributable to our Computing Solutions segment.
In addition, five customers accounted for approximately 55% of the net revenue attributable to our Graphics segment.
A loss of any of these customers could have a material adverse effect on our business.
Typically, distributors handle a wide variety of products, including those that compete with our products.
Distributors typically maintain an inventory of our products.
In most instances, our agreements with distributors protect their inventory of our products against price reductions and provide return rights with respect to any product that we have removed from our price book that is not more than twelve months older than the manufacturing code date.
In addition, some agreements with our distributors may contain standard stock rotation provisions permitting limited levels of product returns.
We strive to establish and broaden our relationships with AIB manufacturers.
We offer component-level graphics and chipset products to AIB manufacturers who in turn build and sell board-level products using our technology to system integrators, or SIs, and at retail.
Our agreements with AIBs protect their inventory of our products against price reductions.
We also sell directly to our SI customers.
SIs typically sell from positions of regional or product-based strength in the market.
They usually operate on short design cycles and can respond quickly with new technologies.
SIs often use discrete graphics solutions as a means to differentiate their products and add value to their customers.
Generally, the IC industry is intensely competitive.
Products typically compete on product quality, power consumption (including battery life), reliability, speed, performance, size (or form factor), cost, selling price, adherence to industry standards (and the creation of open industry standards), software and hardware compatibility and stability, brand recognition, timely product introductions and availability.
Technological advances in the industry result in frequent product introductions, regular price reductions, short product life cycles and increased product capabilities that may result in significant performance improvements.
Our ability to compete depends on our ability to develop, introduce and sell new products or enhanced versions of existing products on a timely basis and at competitive prices, while reducing our costs.
Intel Corporation has dominated the market for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives, and to discipline customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
OEMs that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its dominant position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its integrated chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
The continued improvement of the quality of Intel’s integrated graphics, along with higher unit shipments of our APU products, may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for mobile PCs, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Other competitors include companies providing ARM-based designs used in the mobile and embedded electronics market as relatively low cost and small microprocessors and also in form factors that offer an alternative to mainstream PCs such as netbooks and tablets.
ARM Limited designs and licenses its ARM architecture and offers supporting software and services.
Our ability to compete with companies who use ARM-based solutions depends on our ability to design energy-efficient, high-performing products at an attractive price point.
In addition, Nvidia has begun to build custom CPU cores based on ARM architecture to support future products ranging from PCs and servers to workstations and super computers.
In the chipset market, our competitors include suppliers of integrated graphics chipsets.
PC manufacturers use integrated chipsets because they cost less than traditional discrete GPUs while offering acceptable graphics performance for most mainstream PC users.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor in this market.
In the graphics market, our competitors include suppliers of discrete graphics, embedded graphics processors and integrated graphics chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells embedded graphics processors and integrated graphics (IGP) chipsets, and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
The continued improvement of the quality of Intel’s integrated graphics, along with higher unit shipments of our APUs, may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for mobile PCs, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could take actions that place our discrete GPUs and integrated chipsets at a competitive disadvantage such as giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Other than Intel, our principal competitor in the graphics market is Nvidia.
AMD and Nvidia are the two principal players offering discrete graphics solutions.
Other competitors include a number of smaller companies, which may have greater flexibility to address specific market needs, but less financial resources to do so, especially as we believe that the growing complexity of visual processors and the associated research and development costs represent an increasingly higher barrier to entry in this market.
In the game console category, we compete primarily against Nvidia.
Other competitors include Intel and ARM.
We focus our research and development activities on improving and enhancing product design.
One main area of focus is on delivering the next generation of products with greater system level integration of the CPU and GPU, improved system performance and performance-per- watt characteristics.
For example, we are focusing on improving the battery life of our microprocessors and APU products for mobile PCs and the power efficiency of our microprocessors for servers.
We are also focusing on delivering a range of low power integrated platforms to serve key markets, including commercial clients, mobile computing, and gaming and media computing, as well as developing a Heterogeneous System Architecture, which is designed for software developers to easily program APUs by combining scalar processing on the CPU with parallel processing on the GPU, all while providing high bandwidth access to memory at low power.
We believe that these integrated platforms will bring customers better time-to-market and increased performance and energy efficiency.
We also work with industry leaders on process technology, software and other functional intellectual property and we work with others in the industry, public foundations, universities and industry consortia to conduct early stage research and development.
Our research and development expenses for 2011, 2010 and 2009 were approximately $1.5 billion, $1.4 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively.
For more information, see Part II, Item 7—“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A.
We conduct product and system research and development activities for our products in the United States with additional design and development engineering teams located in Canada, India, China, Singapore, Taiwan, Germany, United Kingdom, Israel and Japan.
Manufacturing Arrangements and Assembly and Test Facilities Wafer Supply Agreement.
At the closing of the transactions, we entered into a Wafer Supply Agreement (WSA), which governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor unit and APU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
On April 2, 2011, we amended the WSA.
The primary effect of the amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors, including APU products.
The amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
Pursuant to the amendment, GF committed to provide us with, and we committed to purchase, a fixed number of 45nm and 32nm wafers per quarter in 2011.
We paid GF a fixed price for 45nm wafers delivered in 2011.
Our price for 32nm wafers varied based on the wafer volumes and manufacturing yield of such wafers and was based on good die.
In addition, we also agreed to pay an additional quarterly amount to GF during 2012 totaling up to $430 million if GF met specified conditions related to continued availability of 32nm capacity as of the beginning of 2012.
Under the current terms of the WSA, in 2012, we will compensate GF on a cost plus basis for projected manufacturing capacity that we have requested for our microprocessors, including our APU products.
However, we are currently in the process of negotiating a second amendment to the WSA, including the pricing methodology.
If we do not successfully conclude our negotiations, it could have a material adverse impact on our gross margins and our results of operations.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider, and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
GF manufactures our microprocessors on 300 millimeter wafers using primarily 45nm and 32nm process technology.
We are in production in TSMC’s 300 millimeter and 200 millimeter fabrication facilities in technologies ranging from 65nm to 28nm.
Smaller process geometries can lead to gains in performance, lower power consumption and lower per unit manufacturing costs.
We continue to have our products manufactured on more advanced process technology because using more advanced process technology can contribute to lower product manufacturing costs and improve a product’s performance and power efficiency.
We own and operate three assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Some wafers for our microprocessor, graphics processor and embedded processor products are delivered from third-party foundries to our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities are described in the chart set forth below: The remaining wafers for our graphics products are delivered from third party foundries to our test, assembly and packaging partners located in Asia-Pacific region who package and test the final semiconductor products.
We rely on contracts and intellectual property rights to protect our products and technologies from unauthorized third-party copying and use.
Intellectual property rights include copyrights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, trade secrets and maskwork rights.
As of December 31, 2011 we had approximately 4,500 patents in the United States and approximately 1,500 patent applications pending in the United States.
In certain cases, we have filed corresponding applications in foreign jurisdictions.
We expect to file future patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions, as we deem appropriate.
We do not believe that any individual patent, or the expiration thereof, is or would be material to our business.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, we have numerous cross-licensing and technology exchange agreements with other companies under which we both transfer and receive technology and intellectual property rights.
One such agreement is the cross-license agreement that we entered into with Intel on November 11, 2009, in connection with the settlement of our litigation.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has granted to us and our subsidiaries, and we have granted Intel and its subsidiaries, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all patents that are either owned or controlled by the parties at any time that have a first effective filing date or priority date prior to the five-year anniversary of the effective date of the cross license agreement, referred to as the “Capture Period,” to make, have made, use, sell, offer to sell, import and otherwise dispose of certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products anywhere in the world.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has rights to make semiconductor products for third parties, but the third party product designs are not licensed as a result of such manufacture.
We have rights to perform assembly and testing for third parties but not rights to make semiconductor products for third parties.
The term of the cross license agreement continues until the expiration of the last to expire of the licensed patents, unless earlier terminated.
A party can terminate the cross license agreement or the rights and licenses of the other party if the other party materially breaches the cross license agreement and does not correct the noticed material breach within 60 days.
Upon such termination, the terminated party’s license rights terminate but the terminating party’s license rights continue, subject to that party’s continued compliance with the terms of the cross license agreement.
The cross license agreement and the Capture Period will automatically terminate if a party undergoes a change of control (as defined in the cross license agreement) and both parties’ licenses will terminate.
Upon the bankruptcy of a party, that party may assume, but may not assign, the cross license agreement, and in the event that the cross license agreement cannot be assumed, the cross license agreement and the licenses granted will terminate.
We also have a patent cross license agreement with GF pursuant to which each party granted to the other a non-exclusive license under patents filed by a party (or are otherwise acquired by a party) within a certain number of years following the effective date of the agreement.
In 2009, under the agreements with GF, we assigned approximately 3,000 patents and approximately 1,000 patent applications to GF.
GF owns its allocation of patents and applications subject to pre-existing rights, licenses or immunities granted to third parties relating to such patents and applications.
The patents and patent applications to be owned by each party after the division were licensed to the other party pursuant to the agreement.
In addition, we entered into a Non-Patent Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer Agreement with GF pursuant to which we assigned to GF all of our right, title and interest in technology and non-patent intellectual property rights used exclusively in the manufacture, sorting and/or intermediate testing of semiconductor products.
We retained technology and non-patent intellectual property rights used exclusively in the design and/or post-fabrication delivery testing of semiconductors.
Technology and non-patent intellectual property rights used both in the manufacture, sorting and/or intermediate testing of semiconductor products and in the design and/or post-fabrication delivery testing of semiconductor products is owned jointly by us and GF.
We sell standard lines of products.
Sales are made primarily pursuant to purchase orders for current delivery or agreements covering purchases over a period of time.
Some of these orders or agreements may be revised or cancelled without penalty.
Generally, in light of current industry practice, we do not believe that such orders or agreements provide meaningful backlog figures or are necessarily indicative of actual sales for any succeeding period.
As of December 31, 2011, we had approximately 11,100 employees.
Many aspects of our business operations and products are regulated by domestic and international environmental laws and regulations.
These regulations include limitations on discharge of pollutants to air, water, and soil; remediation requirements; product chemical content limitations; manufacturing chemical use and handling restrictions; pollution control requirements; waste minimization considerations; and requirements with respect to treatment, transport, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes.
If we fail to comply with any of the applicable environmental regulations we may be subject to fines, suspension of production, alteration of our manufacturing processes, import/export restrictions, sales limitations, and/or criminal and civil liabilities.
Existing or future regulations could require us to procure expensive pollution abatement or remediation equipment; to modify product designs; or to incur other expenses to comply with environmental regulations.
Any failure to adequately control the use, disposal or storage, or discharge of hazardous substances could expose us to future liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on our business.
We believe we are in material compliance with applicable environmental requirements and do not expect those requirements to result in material expenditures in the foreseeable future.
Environmental laws are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time.
We face increasing complexity in our product design and procurement operations as we adjust to new and future requirements relating to the chemical and material composition of our products.
For example, the European Union (EU) and China are two among a growing number of jurisdictions that have enacted in recent years restrictions on the use of lead, among other chemicals, in electronic products with other countries implementing similar restrictions.
These regulations affect semiconductor devices and packaging.
There is a risk that the cost, quality and manufacturing yields of products that are required to be lead-free, as defined by these regulations, or that are subject to other chemical restrictions, may be less favorable compared to products that are not subject to chemical restrictions, or that the transition to products subject to lead-free or other chemical restrictions may produce sudden changes in demand, which may result in excess inventory.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires the SEC to establish new disclosure and reporting requirements for those companies who use “conflict” minerals mined from the Democratic Republic of Congo and adjoining countries in their products, whether or not these products are manufactured by third parties.
When these new requirements are implemented, they could affect the sourcing and availability of minerals used in the manufacture of semiconductor devices, and there will be additional costs associated with complying with the disclosure requirements, such as costs related to determining the source of any conflicting minerals used in our products.
Also, since our supply chain is complex, we may face reputational challenges if we are unable to sufficiently verify the origins for all metals used in our products through the due diligence procedures that we implement.
Moreover, we may encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the components of our products are certified as conflict free.
The statements in this report include forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations.
These forward- looking statements should not be relied upon as predictions of future events as we cannot assure you that the events or circumstances reflected in these statements will be achieved or will occur.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward-looking terminology including “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “pro forma,” “estimates,” or “anticipates” or the negative of these words and phrases or other variations of these words and phrases or comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements relate to, among other things: demand for our products; the growth, change and competitive landscape of the markets in which we participate; our ability to obtain sufficient external financing on favorable terms, or at all; the nature and extent of our future payments to GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. (GF) under the wafer supply agreement (WSA) and the materiality of these payments; our ability to negotiate future amendments to the WSA; PC market conditions; our restructuring plan implemented in the fourth quarter of 2012, including, cash expenditures, and operational savings; the level of international sales as compared to total sales; our ability to sell our auction rate securities within the next twelve months; that our first ARM technology-based AMD Opteron™ processor for servers is targeted for production in 2014; that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and available external financing will be sufficient to fund our operations including capital expenditures over the next twelve months; our dependence on a small number of customers; our hedging strategy; and the timing of the implementation of certain ENERGYSTAR specifications.
Material factors and assumptions that were applied in making these forward-looking statements include, without limitation, the following: the expected rate of market growth and demand for our products and technologies (and the mix thereof); GF’s manufacturing yields and wafer volumes; our expected market share; our expected product costs and average selling price; our overall competitive position and the competitiveness of our current and future products; our ability to introduce new products, consistent with our current roadmap; our ability to make additional investment in research and development and that such opportunities will be available; the expected demand for computers; and the state of credit markets and macroeconomic conditions.
Material factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, without limitation, the following: that Intel Corporation’s pricing, marketing and rebating programs, product bundling, standard setting, new product introductions or other activities may negatively impact our plans; that we will require additional funding and may be unable to raise sufficient capital on favorable terms, or at all; that customers stop buying our products or materially reduce their operations or demand for our products; that we may be unable to develop, launch and ramp new products and technologies in the volumes that are required by the market at mature yields on a timely basis; that our third party foundry suppliers will be unable to transition our products to advanced manufacturing process technologies in a timely and effective way or to manufacture our products on a timely basis in sufficient quantities and using competitive process technologies; that we will be unable to obtain sufficient manufacturing capacity or components to meet demand for our products or will not fully utilize our projected manufacturing capacity needs at GFs microprocessor manufacturing facilities; that our requirements for wafers will be less than the fixed number of wafers that we agreed to purchase from GF or GF encounters problems that significantly reduce the number of functional die we receive from each wafer; that we are unable to successfully implement our long-term business strategy; that we inaccurately estimate the quantity or type of products that our customers will want in the future or will ultimately end up purchasing, resulting in excess or obsolete inventory; that we are unable to manage the risks related to the use of our third-party distributors and add-in-board (AIB) partners or offer the appropriate incentives to focus them on the sale of our products; that we may be unable to maintain the level of investment in research and development that is required to remain competitive; that there may be unexpected variations in market growth and demand for our products and technologies in light of the product mix that we may have available at any particular time; that global business and economic conditions will not improve or will worsen; that PC market conditions do not improve or will worsen; that demand for computers will be lower than currently expected; and the effect of political or economic instability, domestically or internationally, on our sales or supply chain.
For a discussion of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements, see “Part I, Item 1A—Risk Factors” and the “Financial Condition” section set forth in “Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A, beginning on page 41 below and such other risks and uncertainties as set forth below in this report or detailed in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports and filings.
We assume no obligation to update forward-looking statements.
We are a global semiconductor company with facilities around the world.
Within the global semiconductor industry, we offer primarily: x86 microprocessors, as standalone devices or as incorporated as an accelerated processing unit (APU), for the commercial and consumer markets, embedded microprocessors for commercial, commercial client and consumer markets and chipsets for desktop and mobile devices, including mobile personal computers, or PCs, and tablets, professional workstations and servers; and graphics, video and multimedia products for desktop and mobile devices, including mobile PCs and tablets, home media PCs and professional workstations, servers and technology for game consoles.
For financial information about geographic areas and for segment information with respect to revenues and operating results, refer to the information set forth in Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements, beginning on page 101 below.
We were incorporated under the laws of Delaware on May 1, 1969 and became a publicly held company in 1972.
Since 1979 our common stock has been listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “AMD.” Our mailing address and executive offices are located at One AMD Place, Sunnyvale, California 94088, and our telephone number is (408) 749-4000.
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, ATI, the ATI logo, AMD Athlon, AMD Opteron, AMD Phenom, AMD Sempron, AMD Turion, FirePro, FireStream, CrossFire, Radeon, and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Microsoft, Windows, and DirectX are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other jurisdictions.
HyperTransport is a licensed trademark of the HyperTransport Technology Consortium.
Other names are for informational purposes only and are used to identify companies and products and may be trademarks of their respective owners.
We post on the Investor Relations pages of our Web site, www.amd.com, a link to our filings with the SEC, our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Ethics for our Executive Officers and all other senior finance executives, our “Worldwide Standards of Business Conduct,” which applies to our Board of Directors and all of our employees, and the charters of the Audit and Finance, Compensation and Nominating and Corporate Governance committees of our Board of Directors.
Our filings with the SEC are posted as soon as reasonably practical after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
You can also obtain copies of these documents by writing to us at: Corporate Secretary, AMD, 7171 Southwest Parkway, M/S 100, Austin, Texas 78735, or emailing us at: Corporate.Secretary@amd.com.
All of these documents and filings are available free of charge.
If we make substantive amendments to our Code of Ethics, or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions, we intend to disclose the nature of such amendment or waiver on our Web site or in a Current Report on Form 8-K in accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
Please note that information contained on our Web site is not incorporated by reference in, or considered to be a part of, this report.
Semiconductors are components used in a variety of electronic products and systems.
An integrated circuit, or IC, is a semiconductor device that consists of many interconnected transistors on a single chip.
Since the invention of the transistor in 1948, improvements in IC process and design technologies have led to the development of smaller, more complex and more reliable ICs at a lower cost per function.
In order to satisfy the demand for faster, smaller and lower-cost ICs, semiconductor companies have continually developed improvements in manufacturing and process technology and design.
ICs are increasingly being manufactured using smaller geometries on larger silicon wafers.
Use of smaller process geometries can result in products that are higher performing, use less power and cost less to manufacture on a per unit basis.
A microprocessor is an IC that serves as the central processing unit, or CPU, of a computer.
It generally consists of millions of transistors that process data and control other devices in the system, acting as the brain of the computer.
The performance of a microprocessor is a critical factor impacting the performance of a computer and numerous other electronic systems.
The principal indicators of CPU performance are work-per-cycle, or how many instructions are executed per cycle, clock speed, representing the rate at which a CPUs internal logic operates, measured in units of gigahertz, or billions of cycles per second, and power consumption.
Other factors impacting microprocessor performance include the number of cores in a microprocessor, the bit rating of the microprocessor, memory size and data access speed.
Developments in circuit design and manufacturing process technologies have resulted in significant advances in microprocessor performance.
Currently, microprocessors are designed to process 32 bits or 64 bits of information at one time.
The bit rating of a microprocessor generally denotes the largest size of numerical data that a microprocessor can handle.
Microprocessors with 64-bit processing capabilities enable systems to have greater performance by allowing software applications and operating systems to access more memory.
Moreover, as businesses and consumers require greater performance from their computer systems due to the growth of digital data and increasingly sophisticated software applications, semiconductor companies are designing and developing multi-core microprocessors, where multiple processor cores are placed on a single die or in a single processor.
Multi-core microprocessors offer enhanced overall system performance and efficiency because computing tasks can be spread across two or more processing cores each of which can execute a task at full speed.
Multiple processor cores packaged together can increase performance of a computer system without greatly increasing the total amount of power consumed and the total amount of heat emitted.
This type of “symmetrical multiprocessing” is effective in multi-tasking environments where multiple cores can enable operating systems to prioritize and manage tasks from multiple software applications simultaneously and also for “multi-threaded” software applications where multiple cores can process different parts of the software program, or “threads,” simultaneously thereby enhancing performance of the application.
Businesses and consumers also require computer systems with improved power management technology, which allows them to reduce the power consumption of their computer systems thereby reducing the total cost of ownership.
While general purpose computer architectures based on the x86 architecture are sufficient for many customers, we believe that an architecture that optimizes the use of a CPU and graphics processing unit, or GPU, for a given workload can provide a substantial improvement in user experience, performance and energy efficiency.
As the volume of digital media increases, we believe end users can benefit from an accelerated computing architecture.
An accelerated computing architecture enables “offloading” of selected tasks, thereby optimizing the use of multiple computational units such as the CPU and GPU, depending on the application or workload.
For example, serial workloads are better suited for CPUs, while highly parallel tasks may be better performed by a GPU.
Our AMD Accelerated Processing Unit, or APU, combines our CPU and GPU onto a single piece of silicon.
We believe that high performance computing workloads, workloads that are visual in nature and even traditional applications such as photo and video editing or other multi-media applications can benefit from our accelerated computing architecture.
We currently design, develop and sell microprocessor products for servers, desktop PCs and mobile devices, including mobile PCs and tablets.
Our microprocessors and chipsets are incorporated into computing platforms that also include GPUs and core software to enable and advance the computing components.
A platform is a collection of technologies that are designed to work together to provide a more complete computing solution.
We believe that integrated, balanced platforms consisting of microprocessors, chipsets and GPUs that work together at the system level bring end users improved system stability, increased performance and enhanced power efficiency.
Furthermore, by combining all of these elements onto a single piece of silicon as an APU, we believe system performance and power efficiency is further improved.
In addition to the enhancements at the end-user level, we believe our customers also benefit from an all-AMD platform, as we are able to provide them with a single point of contact for the key platform components and enable them to bring the platforms to market faster in a variety of client and server system form factors.
Our CPUs and APUs are manufactured primarily using 45-nanometer (nm), 40nm, 32nm or 28nm process technology.
We currently base our microprocessors and chipsets on the x86 instruction set architecture and AMD’s Direct Connect Architecture, which connects an on-chip memory controller and input/output, or I/O, channels directly to one or more microprocessor cores.
We typically integrate two or more processor cores onto a single die, and each core has its own dedicated cache, which is memory that is located on the semiconductor die, permitting quicker access to frequently used data and instructions.
Some of our microprocessors have additional levels of cache such as L2, or second level cache, and L3, or third level cache, to enable faster data access and higher performance.
Energy efficiency and power consumption continue to be key design principles for our products.
We focus on continually improving power management technology, or “performance-per-watt.” To that end, we offer CPUs, APUs and chipsets with features that we have designed to reduce system level energy consumption, with multiple low power states which utilize lower clock speeds and voltages that reduce processor power consumption during both active and idle times.
We design our CPUs and APUs to be compatible with operating system software such as the Microsoft® Windows® family of operating systems, Linux®, NetWare®, Solaris and UNIX.
Our AMD family of APUs represents a new approach to processor design and software development, delivering serial, parallel and visual compute capabilities for high definition (HD) video, 3D and data-intensive workloads in the APU.
APUs combine high-performance serial and parallel processing cores with other special-purpose hardware accelerators.
We design our APUs for improved visual computing, security, performance-per-watt and smaller device form factors.
Having the CPU and GPU on the same chip reduces the system power and bill-of- materials, speeds the flow of data between the CPU and GPU through shared memory and allows the GPU to function as both a graphic engine and an application accelerator in high efficient compute platforms.
Building on the integration of our CPU and GPU onto a single piece of silicon, we are focused on evolving our accelerated computing architecture in such a manner so that software programmers see a single multi-purpose processing unit.
Heterogeneous Systems Architecture (HSA) describes our overarching design for having combinations of CPU and GPU processor cores operate as a unified engine that we intend to be both higher performance and lower power than our previous architectures.
Our microprocessors for traditional server platforms consist of our AMD Opteron™ 6000, 4000 and 3000 series processors.
We also offer high-density server platforms consisting of AMD’s SeaMicro SM10000™ and SM15000™ server chassis, as well as AMD’s SeaMicro Freedom™ Fabric Storage series of storage systems.
In March 2012, we acquired SeaMicro, Inc., an energy-efficient, high-bandwidth microserver company to accelerate our strategy to deliver server technology and provide end users serving Cloud-centric data centers with highly-differentiated AMD-based solutions.
Our fabric technology, AMD SeaMicro Freedom supercompute fabric, links together hundreds of card-sized CPUs to create a large array of independent but linked CPUs.
Work is distributed over these CPUs through hardware and software based load-balancing technology that directs traffic across the fabric such that each CPU is in its most efficient zone of performance.
We designed this fabric to reduce power consumption while providing lower latency, lower cost and higher bandwidth.
In March 2012, we launched the AMD Opteron 3200 Series server processor.
This entry-level server processor is designed for dedicated web hosting providers who are seeking enterprise-class servers at lower price points.
In September 2012, we announced AMD’s SeaMicro SM15000 server chassis, which extends fabric-based computing across racks and aisles of the data center to connect directly to large data storage systems.
In November 2012, we launched the AMD Opteron 6300 Series processor based on “Piledriver,” our next-generation high performance x86 multi-core architecture.
We designed the AMD Opteron 6300 Series processor to balance performance, scalability and cost effectiveness to help IT organizations lower total cost of ownership.
In December 2012, we launched the AMD Opteron 4300 and 3300 Series server processor, which is also based on our next-generation “Piledriver” core architecture.
These processors are designed for cloud providers, web hosts and small- and medium-sized businesses to help them address space and power constraints.
Our CPUs for mobile PC platforms also consist of the AMD Phenom™ II Mobile Processor, AMD Turion™ X2 Mobile Processor, AMD Turion II Mobile Processor, AMD Turion II Ultra Mobile Processor, AMD Athlon™ II processor, and the Mobile AMD Sempron™ processor.
Our CPUs for desktop PC platforms also consist of the following: AMD FX processors based on the “Bulldozer” and “Piledriver” x86 multi-core architecture, which are available in quad- and dual-core technology, AMD Athlon II processors, which are available in quad-, triple- and dual- core versions, and AMD Sempron processors, which are available in limited quantities and in select regions.
Typically, our embedded products are used in applications that require high to moderate levels of performance where key features include low cost, mobility, low power and small form factor.
High performance graphics are increasingly important in many embedded systems.
Customers of our embedded products include vendors in industrial controls, digital signage, point of sale/self-service kiosks, medical imaging, set-top box and casino gaming machines as well as enterprise class telecommunications, networking, security, storage systems and thin-clients, or computers that serve as an access device on a network.
The embedded market has moved from developing proprietary, custom designs to leveraging the industry-standard x86 instruction set architecture as a way to reduce costs and speed time to market.
Customer requirements for these systems include: very low power for small enclosures and 24x7 operation, support for Linux, Windows and other operating systems, and high-performance for increasingly sophisticated applications.
Other requirements include advanced specifications for industrial temperatures, shock and vibration, and reliability.
Our embedded platforms include options from the AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron processor families; the AMD Embedded G-Series, which is the embedded version of our APUs; the AMD Radeon™ graphics processor family; and numerous AMD chipsets.
These products are part of the AMD Longevity Program, which provides for an availability period of up to five years in some cases in order to support lengthy development and qualification cycles and long-term life of the system in the market.
In May 2012, we launched the AMD Embedded R-Series APU designed for mid- to high-end graphics-intensive applications such as digital signage, casino gaming, point-of-sale systems and kiosks, as well as parallel-processing-intensive applications spanning medical imaging and security/surveillance.
The AMD Embedded R-Series APU combines the new “Piledriver” architecture, with discrete class AMD Radeon™ HD 7000 series graphics that support Microsoft® DirectX® 11 (DirectX 11).
A chipset is the set of components that manages data flow between a processor (or processors), memory and peripherals (such as the keyboard, mouse, monitor, hard drive and CD or DVD drive).
Chipsets perform essential logic functions and balance the performance of the system and aid in removing bottlenecks.
Chipsets often include graphics, audio, video and other capabilities.
All desktop and mobile PCs as well as servers have a chipset.
In many PCs, the chipset includes a graphics processing unit (GPU).
A GPU within the chipset solution is commonly known as an integrated graphics processor (IGP), and such a chipset may be called an IGP chipset.
In a system without an integrated graphics processor, a discrete GPU is usually required.
By not necessitating a discrete GPU, IGP chipsets offer a lower cost solution and reduced power consumption and enable smaller system form factors.
With our APU architecture, the GPU is included in the APU and the AMD Controller Hub chip performs the input and output functions of the chipset.
We believe that the combination of an APU and the AMD Controller Hub will replace our market for IGP chipsets.
Our portfolio of chipset products includes chipsets with and without IGPs for desktop PCs and servers, and AMD Controller Hub-based chipsets for our APUs.
We offer AMD A50-Series, A60-Series and A70-Series chipsets for our mobile PC platforms.
As well, we offer AMD 9-Series, 8-Series, 7-Series Discrete and AMD 7-Series Integrated chipsets for desktop PCs.
A graphics solution can be in the form of either an APU, a GPU, an IGP, or a combination of a GPU with one of the other foregoing products working in tandem.
The semiconductor graphics market addresses the need for visual or parallel processing in various computing and entertainment platforms such as desktop PCs, mobile PCs and workstations APUs and IGPs deliver discrete GPU level functionality for value and mainstream PCs while discrete GPUs are specifically architected for high performance graphics processing.
A dedicated GPU and CPU work in tandem to increase overall speed and performance of the system.
Users of these graphics products value a rich visual experience, particularly in the high-end enthusiast market where consumers often seek out the fastest and highest performing visual processing products to enable the most compelling and immersive experiences.
Moreover, for many consumers, the PC is evolving from a traditional data processing and communications device to an entertainment platform.
Visual realism and graphical display capabilities are key elements of product differentiation among various product platforms.
This has led to the increasing creation and use of processing intensive multimedia content for PCs and to manufacturers designing PCs for playing games, displaying photos and capturing TV and other multimedia content, viewing online videos, photo editing and managing digital content.
In turn, the trend has contributed to the development of higher performance graphics solutions.
Our customers generally use our graphics solutions to increase the speed of rendering images and to improve image resolution and color definition.
We develop our products for use in desktop and mobile PCs, professional workstations, servers and gaming consoles.
With each of our graphics products, we provide drivers and supporting software packages that enable the effective use of these products under a variety of operating systems and applications.
In addition, our recent generation graphics products have Linux® driver support.
Heavy computational workloads have traditionally been processed on a CPU, but we believe that the industry is shifting to a new computing paradigm that increasingly relies more on the GPU or a combination of GPU and CPU.
AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing or GPGPU (General Purpose GPU) refers to a set of advanced hardware and software technologies that enable AMD GPUs, working in concert with the computer system’s CPUs, to accelerate applications beyond traditional graphics and video processing by allowing the CPUs and GPUs to process information cooperatively.
Heterogeneous computing, which refers to computer systems that use more than one kind of processor, enables PCs and servers to run computationally-intensive tasks more efficiently, which we believe provides a superior application experience to the end user.
We believe that discrete graphic solutions will continue to be popular across desktop PC configurations and platforms designed for gaming, multimedia, photo and video editing as well as other graphic-intensive applications.
Our discrete GPUs for desktop PCs include the AMD Radeon HD 8000 series, AMD Radeon 7000 series, AMD Radeon HD 6000 series, ATI Radeon HD 5000 series, ATI Radeon HD 4000 series and ATI Radeon HD 3000 series.
In 2012, we introduced a number of new GPUs based on 28nm process technology and our Graphics Core Next, or GCN, architecture.
GCN architecture is our first design specifically engineered for general computing, enabling a GPU to handle workloads and programming languages traditionally exclusive to the CPU.
In February 2012, we launched the AMD Radeon HD 7770 GHz Edition, AMD Radeon HD 7750 and AMD Radeon HD 7700 GPUs.
In March 2012, we introduced the AMD Radeon HD 7870 GHz Edition and AMD Radeon HD 7850 GPUs.
The AMD Radeon HD 7870 GHz Edition features AMD PowerTune technology and AMD ZeroCore Power technology.
AMD ZeroCore Power technology powers down a GPU when the PC is in a long idle state and applications are not using background GPU resources.
In June 2012, we launched the AMD Radeon™ HD 7970 GHz Edition GPU featuring next generation AMD Eyefinity technology, AMD Power Tune with Boost and AMD App Acceleration.
AMD PowerTune technology manages GPU power consumption in response to GPU load conditions and allows for the GPU to run at higher clock speeds than otherwise possible.
AMD PowerTune with Boost further increases the clock speed of a GPU.
AMD App Acceleration is a set of technologies designed to improve video quality and enhance application performance.
AMD Eyefinity technology allows for up to six independent and simultaneous monitors to be connected to one GPU.
When selecting a graphics solution, key considerations for mobile PC manufacturers are graphics performance, visual experience, power efficiency, dedicated memory support and ease of design integration.
Our discrete GPUs for mobile PCs include the following: AMD Radeon HD 8000M series, AMD Radeon 7000M series, AMD Radeon HD 6000M series, ATI Mobility Radeon HD 5000 series and ATI Mobility Radeon HD 4000 series.
In April 2012, we launched AMD Radeon HD 7900M, HD 7800M and HD 7700M series GPUs.
These new graphics processors are all based on 28nm process technology and our GCN architecture.
In addition, the AMD Radeon HD 7000M series GPUs have AMD Enduro™ Technology, which is a power solution that automatically switches between integrated graphics and the AMD Radeon discrete GPU, depending on the system or application requirements, to help maximize battery life.
Our AMD FirePro™ family of professional graphics products consist of 3D and 2D multi-view graphics cards and GPUs that we designed for integration in mobile and desktop workstations, as well as business PCs.
We designed our AMD FirePro 3D graphics cards for demanding applications such as those found in the computer aided design (CAD) and digital content creation (DCC) markets, with drivers specifically tuned for maximum performance, stability and reliability across a wide range of software packages.
We designed our AMD FirePro 2D graphics cards with dual and quad display outputs for financial and corporate environments.
We also provide graphics products for the server market where we leverage our graphics expertise and align our offerings to provide the stability, video quality and bus architectures desired by our customers.
Through our ATI CrossFire Pro™, we enable CAD and DCC professionals to connect two identical AMD FirePro 3D graphics cards with a flex cable connection that can enhance performance of geometry- limited applications.
In February 2012, we introduced the AMD FirePro V3900, an entry-level professional graphics card that features AMD Eyefinity technology.
In August 2012, we announced AMD FirePro S9000 and S7000 server graphics cards for the high-end workstation market.
In addition, we launched the next generation of AMD FirePro workstation products, W5000, W7000, W8000 and W9000 GPUs designed to balance compute and 3-D workloads efficiently for CAD and engineering and for media and entertainment professionals.
We also launched AMD FirePro A300 APU for entry-level and mainstream desktop workstations for users who require a high-performance computing platform to power their professional applications.
In November 2012, we introduced AMD FirePro S10000 server graphics card designed for high- performance computing workloads and graphic intensive applications.
We designed our AMD FireStream™ series of products to utilize the parallel stream processing power of the GPU for heavy floating-point computations and to meet the requirements of various industries, such as the high-performance computing and the scientific and financial sectors.
Semiconductor graphics suppliers have leveraged their core visual and graphics processing technologies developed for the PC market by providing graphic solutions to game console manufacturers.
In this market, semiconductor graphics suppliers work alongside game console manufacturers to enhance the visual experience for users of sophisticated video games.
We leverage our core visual processing technology into the game console market by licensing customized GPUs for graphics in videogame consoles such as the Microsoft® Xbox 360™, Nintendo Wii and Wii U from Nintendo.
We sell our products through our direct sales force and through independent distributors and sales representatives in both domestic and international markets pursuant to non-exclusive agreements.
Our sales arrangements generally operate on the basis of product forecasts provided by the particular customer, but do not typically include any commitment or requirement for minimum product purchases.
We primarily use purchase orders, sales order acknowledgments and contractual agreements as evidence of our sales arrangements.
Our agreements typically contain standard terms and conditions covering matters such as payment terms, warranties and indemnities for issues specific to our products.
We generally warrant that our products sold to our customers will conform to our approved specifications and be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service for one year.
Subject to certain exceptions, we also offer a three-year limited warranty to end users for only those CPU and AMD A-Series APU products that are commonly referred to as “processors in a box” and for PC workstation products.
We have also offered extended limited warranties to certain customers of “tray” microprocessor products and/or workstation graphics products who have written agreements with us and target their computer systems at the commercial and/or embedded markets.
We market and sell our products under the AMD trademark.
Our desktop PC product brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series, AMD E-Series, AMD FX, AMD Athlon and AMD Sempron.
Our mobile PC brands for microprocessors are AMD A-Series A, AMD E-Series, AMD C-Series, AMD Z-Series, AMD Phenom, AMD Athlon, AMD Turion and AMD Sempron.
Our server brand for microprocessors is AMD Opteron.
We sell micro-server systems products under the SeaMicro brand, including SM10000 and SM15000 series for fabric compute systems, and Freedom Fabric Storage series for storage systems.
We also sell low-power versions of our AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon, AMD Sempron and AMD Embedded A-Series processors as embedded processor solutions.
Our product brand for the consumer graphics market is AMD Radeon.
Our product brand for professional graphics products is AMD FirePro.
We also market and sell our chipsets under the AMD trademark.
We launch or update new platforms for consumers in the desktop and mobile markets under our VISION Technology from AMD brand.
We designed VISION Technology to simplify the buying process for consumers by more clearly connecting our brand to the level of activities that consumers want to perform on the PC.
VISION Technology contains multiple levels of increasingly rich PC system capabilities to address the diverse needs of today’s PC users.
VISION Technology initially consisted of four levels of PC system capabilities: VISION, VISION Premium, VISION Ultimate and VISION Black.
Our VISION Technology brand for our low-power APU products, consists of VISION E1 and VISION E2 for our entry level PCs.
Our VISION Technology brand for performance series APUs consisting of four levels of PC system capabilities: VISION A4, VISION A6, VISION A8, and VISION FX.
These VISION tiers are for 2011 and later systems powered by our APUs and provide increasingly higher PC capabilities.
An additional tier, VISION A10, was introduced in September 2012.
VISION E1, E2, and A4 based desktops and notebooks are targeted at PC users who require basic digital media consumption such as watching DVDs, photo viewing, casual gaming, listening to music, and Internet browsing.
VISION A6, A8 and A10 based desktops and notebooks are designed to allow a greater computing performance for digital consumption and creation.
These activities include watching HD movies, photo editing, DirectX 11 gaming, multi-tasking, and video editing.
VISION FX desktops are based on the AMD FX processor and an AMD Radeon HD 6000, HD 7000 or HD 8000 series graphics card.
We designed these VISION FX systems to enable the highest capabilities sought by enthusiasts and are only available on desktop PCs.
There is also VISION Pro Technology, which is designed for business users and extends the approach of VISION Technology to commercial PC platforms.
We market our products through our direct marketing and co-marketing programs.
In addition, we have cooperative advertising and marketing programs with customers and third parties, including market development programs, pursuant to which we may provide product information, training, marketing materials and funds.
Under our co-marketing development programs, eligible customers can use market development funds as partial reimbursement for advertisements and marketing programs related to our products and third party systems integrating our products, subject to meeting defined criteria.
Original Equipment Manufacturers, or OEMs, may qualify for market development funds based on purchases of eligible products.
Our microprocessor customers consist primarily of OEMs, original design manufacturers, or ODMs, system builders and independent distributors in both domestic and international markets.
ODMs provide design and/or manufacturing services to branded and unbranded private label resellers, OEMs and system builders.
Our graphics products customers include the foregoing as well as AIBs, or add-in-board manufacturers.
Customers of our chipset products consist primarily of PC and server OEMs, often through ODMs or other contract manufacturers, who build the OEM motherboards, as well as desktop and server motherboard manufacturers who incorporate chipsets into their channel motherboards.
Our sales and marketing teams work closely with our customers to define product features, performance and timing of new products so that the products we are developing meet our customers’ needs.
We also employ application engineers to assist our customers in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products in order to assist in optimizing product compatibility.
We believe that our commitment to customer service and design support improves our customers’ time-to-market and fosters relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
We focus on three types of OEMs: multi-nationals, selected regional accounts and target market customers.
Large multi-nationals and regional accounts are our core OEM customers.
Our OEM customers include numerous foreign and domestic manufacturers of servers and workstations, desktop and mobile PCs, and PC motherboards.
In 2012, Hewlett-Packard Company accounted for more than 10% of our consolidated net revenues.
Sales to Hewlett-Packard consisted primarily of products from our Computing Solutions segment.
Five customers, including Hewlett-Packard, accounted for approximately 59% of the net revenue attributable to our Computing Solutions segment.
In addition, five customers accounted for approximately 48% of the net revenue attributable to our Graphics segment.
A loss of any of these customers could have a material adverse effect on our business.
Typically, distributors handle a wide variety of products, including those that compete with our products.
Distributors typically maintain an inventory of our products.
In most instances, our agreements with distributors protect their inventory of our products against price reductions and provide return rights with respect to any product that we have removed from our price book that is not more than twelve months older than the manufacturing code date.
In addition, some agreements with our distributors may contain standard stock rotation provisions permitting limited levels of product returns.
We strive to establish and broaden our relationships with AIB manufacturers.
We offer component-level graphics and chipset products to AIB manufacturers who in turn build and sell board-level products using our technology to system integrators, or SIs, and at retail.
Our agreements with AIBs protect their inventory of our products against price reductions.
We also sell directly to our SI customers.
SIs typically sell from positions of regional or product-based strength in the market.
They usually operate on short design cycles and can respond quickly with new technologies.
SIs often use discrete graphics solutions as a means to differentiate their products and add value to their customers.
Generally, the IC industry is intensely competitive.
Products typically compete on product quality, power consumption (including battery life), reliability, speed, performance, size (or form factor), cost, selling price, adherence to industry standards (and the creation of open industry standards), software and hardware compatibility and stability, brand recognition, timely product introductions and availability.
Technological advances in the industry result in frequent product introductions, regular price reductions, short product life cycles and increased product capabilities that may result in significant performance improvements.
Our ability to compete depends on our ability to develop, introduce and sell new products or enhanced versions of existing products on a timely basis and at competitive prices, while reducing our costs.
Intel Corporation has dominated the market for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives, and to discipline customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its dominant position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its integrated graphics chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Other competitors include companies providing or developing ARM-based designs as relatively low cost and low power processors for the computing market including netbooks, tablets and thin client form factors, as well as dense servers, set-top boxes and gaming consoles.
ARM Holdings designs and licenses its ARM architecture and offers supporting software and services.
Our ability to compete with companies who use ARM-based solutions depends on our ability to design energy-efficient, high-performing products at an attractive price point.
In addition, Nvidia builds custom CPU cores based on ARM architecture to support tablets and small form factor PCs, servers, workstations and super computers.
In the chipset market, our competitors include suppliers of integrated graphics chipsets.
PC manufacturers use integrated chipsets because they cost less than traditional discrete GPUs while offering acceptable graphics performance for most mainstream PC users.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor in this market.
In the graphics market, our competitors include suppliers of discrete graphics, embedded graphics processors and IGPs.
Intel manufactures and sells embedded graphics processors and IGP chipsets, and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
The continued improvement of the quality of Intel’s integrated graphics, along with higher unit shipments of our APUs, may drive computer manufacturers to reduce the number of systems they build paired with discrete graphics components, particularly for mobile PCs, because they may offer satisfactory graphics performance for most mainstream PC users, at a lower cost.
Intel could take actions that place our discrete GPUs and integrated chipsets at a competitive disadvantage such as giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
Other than Intel, our principal competitor in the graphics market is Nvidia.
AMD and Nvidia are the two principal players offering discrete graphics solutions.
Other competitors include a number of smaller companies, which may have greater flexibility to address specific market needs, but less financial resources to do so, especially as we believe that the growing complexity of visual processors and the associated research and development costs represent an increasingly higher barrier to entry in this market.
In the game console category, we compete primarily against Nvidia.
Other competitors include Intel, ARM and Imagination.
We focus our research and development activities on improving and enhancing product design.
One main area of focus is on delivering the next generation of products with greater system level integration of the CPU and GPU, improved system performance and performance-per- watt characteristics.
For example, we are focusing on improving the battery life of our microprocessors and APU products for mobile PCs and the power efficiency of our microprocessors for servers.
We are also focusing on delivering a range of low power integrated platforms to serve key markets, including commercial clients, mobile computing, and gaming and media computing, as well as developing a Heterogeneous System Architecture, which is designed for software developers to easily program APUs by combining scalar processing on the CPU with parallel processing on the GPU, all while providing high bandwidth access to memory at low power.
We believe that these integrated platforms will bring customers better time-to-market and increased performance and energy efficiency.
We also work with industry leaders on process technology, software and other functional intellectual property and we work with others in the industry, public foundations, universities and industry consortia to conduct early stage research and development.
Our research and development expenses for 2012, 2011 and 2010 were approximately $1.4 billion, $1.5 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively.
For more information, see Part II, Item 7-“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” or MD&A.
We conduct product and system research and development activities for our products in the United States with additional design and development engineering teams located in Canada, India, China, Singapore, Taiwan, United Kingdom, Israel and Japan.
Manufacturing Arrangements and Assembly and Test Facilities Wafer Supply Agreement.
A Wafer Supply Agreement (WSA) governs the terms by which we purchase products manufactured by GF.
Pursuant to the WSA, we are required to purchase all of our microprocessor and APU product requirements from GF with limited exceptions.
On April 2, 2011, we entered into a first amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of the amendment was to change the pricing methodology applicable to wafers delivered in 2011 for our microprocessors, including APU products.
The amendment also modified our existing commitments regarding the production of certain GPU and chipset products at GF.
Pursuant to the amendment, GF committed to provide us with, and we committed to purchase, a fixed number of 45nm and 32nm wafers per quarter in 2011.
We paid GF a fixed price for 45nm wafers delivered in 2011.
Our price for 32nm wafers varied based on the wafer volumes and manufacturing yield of such wafers and was based on good die.
In addition, we also agreed to pay an additional quarterly amount to GF during 2012 totaling up to $430 million if GF met specified conditions related to the continued availability of 32nm capacity as of the beginning of 2012.
As part of the second amendment described below, GF agreed to waive these quarterly payments, and therefore we are no longer required to pay them.
On March 4, 2012, we entered into a second amendment to the WSA.
The primary effect of this second amendment was to modify certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products to be delivered by GF to us during 2012.
Pursuant to the second amendment, GF committed to provide us with, and we committed to purchase, a fixed number of production wafers in 2012.
We paid GF fixed prices for production wafers delivered in 2012.
The second amendment also granted us certain rights to contract with another wafer foundry supplier with respect to specified 28nm products for a specified period of time.
In consideration for these rights, we agreed to pay GF $425 million and transfer to GF all of the capital stock of GF that we owned.
Pursuant to the second amendment, $150 million of the $425 million was paid on March 5, 2012, $50 million was paid on June 29, 2012, $50 million was paid on October 1, 2012, and the remaining $175 million was paid by December 31, 2012.
In addition, as security for the final two payments, we issued a $225 million promissory note to GF.
On December 6, 2012, we entered into a third amendment to the WSA.
Pursuant to the third amendment we modified our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012 under the second amendment to the WSA.
In addition, we agreed to certain pricing and other terms of the WSA applicable to wafers for our microprocessor and APU products to be delivered by GF to us during 2013 and through December 31, 2013.
Pursuant to the third amendment, we committed to purchase a fixed number of production wafers at negotiated prices in the fourth quarter of 2012 and through December 31, 2013.
GF agreed to waive a portion of our wafer purchase commitments for the fourth quarter of 2012.
In consideration for this waiver, we agreed to pay GF a fee of $320 million.
The cash impact of this $320 million fee will be spread over several quarters, with $80 million paid by December 28, 2012 and $40 million payable by April 1, 2013.
For the remainder of the fee, on the same date we entered into the third amendment, we issued a $200 million promissory note to GF that matures on December 31, 2013.
As part of the third amendment, we committed to purchase wafers from GF for approximately $250 million during the first quarter of 2014.
We expect to negotiate the remainder of our 2014 purchase commitments from GF in 2013.
The WSA terminates no later than March 2, 2024.
GF has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to assist us to transition the supply of products to another provider, and to continue to fulfill purchase orders for up to two years following the termination or expiration of the WSA.
During the transition period, pricing for microprocessor products will remain as set forth in the WSA, but our purchase commitments to GF will no longer apply.
GF currently manufactures our microprocessors on 300 millimeter wafers using primarily 45nm and 32nm process technology.
We are in production in TSMC’s 300 millimeter and 200 millimeter fabrication facilities in technologies ranging from 65nm to 28nm.
Smaller process geometries can lead to gains in performance, lower power consumption and lower per unit manufacturing costs.
We continue to have our products manufactured on more advanced process technology because using more advanced process technology can contribute to lower product manufacturing costs and improve a product’s performance and power efficiency.
We own and operate two assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Some wafers for our microprocessor, graphics processor and embedded processor products are delivered from third-party foundries to our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities.
Our assembly, test, mark and packaging facilities are described in the chart set forth below: The remaining wafers for our graphics products are delivered from third party foundries to our test, assembly and packaging partners located in the Asia-Pacific region who package and test the final semiconductor products.
We rely on contracts and intellectual property rights to protect our products and technologies from unauthorized third-party copying and use.
Intellectual property rights include copyrights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, trade secrets and maskwork rights.
As of December 29, 2012, we had approximately 4,700 patents in the United States and approximately 1,600 patent applications pending in the United States.
In certain cases, we have filed corresponding applications in foreign jurisdictions.
We expect to file future patent applications in both the United States and abroad on significant inventions, as we deem appropriate.
We do not believe that any individual patent, or the expiration thereof, is or would be material to our business.
As is typical in the semiconductor industry, we have numerous cross-licensing and technology exchange agreements with other companies under which we both transfer and receive technology and intellectual property rights.
One such agreement is the cross-license agreement that we entered into with Intel on November 11, 2009, in connection with the settlement of our litigation.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has granted to us and our subsidiaries, and we have granted Intel and its subsidiaries, non-exclusive, royalty-free licenses to all patents that are either owned or controlled by the parties at any time that have a first effective filing date or priority date prior to the five-year anniversary of the effective date of the cross license agreement, referred to as the “Capture Period,” to make, have made, use, sell, offer to sell, import and otherwise dispose of certain semiconductor- and electronic-related products anywhere in the world.
Under the cross license agreement, Intel has rights to make semiconductor products for third parties, but the third party product designs are not licensed as a result of such manufacture.
We have rights to perform assembly and testing for third parties but not rights to make semiconductor products for third parties.
The term of the cross license agreement continues until the expiration of the last to expire of the licensed patents, unless earlier terminated.
A party can terminate the cross license agreement or the rights and licenses of the other party if the other party materially breaches the cross license agreement and does not correct the noticed material breach within 60 days.
Upon such termination, the terminated party’s license rights terminate but the terminating party’s license rights continue, subject to that party’s continued compliance with the terms of the cross license agreement.
The cross license agreement and the Capture Period will automatically terminate if a party undergoes a change of control (as defined in the cross license agreement) and both parties’ licenses will terminate.
Upon the bankruptcy of a party, that party may assume, but may not assign, the cross license agreement, and in the event that the cross license agreement cannot be assumed, the cross license agreement and the licenses granted will terminate.
We also have a patent cross license agreement with GF pursuant to which each party granted to the other a non-exclusive license under patents filed by a party (or are otherwise acquired by a party) within a certain number of years following the effective date of the agreement.
In 2009, under the agreements with GF, we assigned approximately 3,000 patents and approximately 1,000 patent applications to GF.
GF owns its allocation of patents and applications subject to pre-existing rights, licenses or immunities granted to third parties relating to such patents and applications.
The patents and patent applications to be owned by each party after the division were licensed to the other party pursuant to the agreement.
In addition, we entered into a Non-Patent Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer Agreement with GF pursuant to which we assigned to GF all of our right, title and interest in technology and non-patent intellectual property rights used exclusively in the manufacture, sorting and/or intermediate testing of semiconductor products.
We retained technology and non-patent intellectual property rights used exclusively in the design and/or post-fabrication delivery testing of semiconductors.
Technology and non-patent intellectual property rights used both in the manufacture, sorting and/or intermediate testing of semiconductor products and in the design and/or post-fabrication delivery testing of semiconductor products are owned jointly by us and GF.
We sell standard lines of products.
Sales are made primarily pursuant to purchase orders for current delivery or agreements covering purchases over a period of time.
Some of these orders or agreements may be revised or cancelled without penalty.
Generally, in light of current industry practice, we do not believe that such orders or agreements provide meaningful backlog figures or are necessarily indicative of actual sales for any succeeding period.
As of December 29, 2012, we had approximately 10,340 employees.
Many aspects of our business operations and products are regulated by domestic and international environmental laws and regulations.
These regulations include limitations on discharge of pollutants to air, water, and soil; remediation requirements; product chemical content limitations; manufacturing chemical use and handling restrictions; pollution control requirements; waste minimization considerations; and requirements with respect to treatment, transport, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes.
If we fail to comply with any of the applicable environmental regulations we may be subject to fines, suspension of production, alteration of our manufacturing processes, import/export restrictions, sales limitations, and/or criminal and civil liabilities.
Existing or future regulations could require us to procure expensive pollution abatement or remediation equipment; to modify product designs; or to incur other expenses to comply with environmental regulations.
Any failure to adequately control the use, disposal or storage, or discharge of hazardous substances could expose us to future liabilities that could have a material adverse effect on our business.
We believe we are in material compliance with applicable environmental requirements and do not expect those requirements to result in material expenditures in the foreseeable future.
Environmental laws are complex, change frequently and have tended to become more stringent over time.
For example, the European Union (EU) and China are two among a growing number of jurisdictions that have enacted restrictions on the use of lead and other materials in electronic products.
Other countries have also implemented similar restrictions.
These regulations affect semiconductor devices and packaging.
As regulations restricting materials in electronic products continue to increase around the world, there is a risk that the cost, quality and manufacturing yields of products that are subject to these restrictions, may be less favorable compared to products that are not subject to such restrictions, or that the transition to compliant products may produce sudden changes in demand, which may result in excess inventory.
In August 2012, the SEC adopted its final rule to implement Section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act regarding disclosure and reporting requirements for companies who use “conflict” minerals mined from the Democratic Republic of Congo and adjoining countries in their products, whether or not these products are manufactured by third parties.
As there are many sources of these materials, these new requirements are unlikely to affect the sourcing of minerals used in the manufacture of semiconductor devices but will add additional costs associated with complying with the disclosure requirements, such as costs related to determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products, auditing the process and reporting to our customers and the US government.
Also, since our supply chain is complex, we may face reputational challenges if we are unable to sufficiently verify the origins of the subject minerals.
Moreover, we may encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the components of our products are certified as conflict free and if we cannot satisfy these customers, they may choose a competitor’s products.
A number of jurisdictions including the EU, Australia and China are developing or finalizing market entry or public procurement requirements for computers and servers based on ENERGY STAR specification as well as additional energy consumption limits.
Some of these regulations are expected to be approved and implemented in 2013.
If such regulations do not contain recommended modifications as proposed by AMD or industry associations, there is the potential for certain of our microprocessor, chipset and GPU products, as incorporated in desktop and mobile PCs, workstations, servers and other information and communications technology products being excluded from some of these markets which could materially adversely affect us.
While we have budgeted for foreseeable associated expenditures, we cannot assure you that future environmental legal requirements will not become more stringent or costly in the future.
Therefore, we cannot assure you that our costs of complying with current and future environmental and health and safety laws, and our liabilities arising from past and future releases of, or exposure to, hazardous substances will not have a material adverse effect on us.
See also, “Item 3- Legal Proceedings—Environmental Matters,” below.
The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face.
If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
In addition, you should consider the interrelationship and compounding effects of two or more risks occurring simultaneously.
Intel Corporation has dominated the market for microprocessors for many years.
Intel’s market share, margins and significant financial resources enable it to market its products aggressively, to target our customers and our channel partners with special incentives, and to discipline customers who do business with us.
These aggressive activities have in the past and are likely in the future to result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products and adversely affect our margins and profitability.
As a result of Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market, Intel has been able to control x86 microprocessor and computer system standards and benchmarks and to dictate the type of products the microprocessor market requires of us.
Intel also dominates the computer system platform, which includes core logic chipsets, graphics chips, motherboards and other components necessary to assemble a computer system.
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), that purchase microprocessors for computer systems are highly dependent on Intel, less innovative on their own and, to a large extent, are distributors of Intel technology.
Additionally, Intel is able to drive de facto standards for x86 microprocessors that could cause us and other companies to have delayed access to such standards.
Intel has substantially greater financial resources than we do and accordingly spends substantially greater amounts on marketing and research and development than we do.
We expect Intel to maintain its dominant position and to continue to invest heavily in marketing, research and development, new manufacturing facilities and other technology companies.
To the extent Intel manufactures a significantly larger portion of its microprocessor products using more advanced process technologies, or introduces competitive new products into the market before we do, we may be more vulnerable to Intel’s aggressive marketing and pricing strategies for microprocessor products.
Intel also leverages its dominance in the microprocessor market to sell its integrated graphics chipsets.
Intel manufactures and sells integrated graphics chipsets bundled with their microprocessors and is a dominant competitor with respect to this portion of our business.
Intel could also take actions that place our discrete GPUs at a competitive disadvantage, including giving one or more of our competitors in the graphics market, such as Nvidia Corporation, preferential access to its proprietary graphics interface or other useful information.
As long as Intel remains in this dominant position, we may be materially adversely affected by Intel’s: business practices, including rebating and allocation strategies and pricing actions, designed to limit our market share and margins; exclusivity payments to its current and potential customers and channel partners; control over industry standards, PC manufacturers and other PC industry participants, including motherboard, memory, chipset and basic input/output system, or BIOS, suppliers and software companies as well as the graphics interface for Intel platforms; and marketing and advertising expenditures in support of positioning the Intel brand over the brand of its OEM customers.
Intel’s dominant position in the microprocessor market and integrated graphics chipset market, its existing relationships with top-tier OEMs and its aggressive marketing and pricing strategies could result in lower unit sales and a lower average selling price for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on us.
Our success depends to a significant extent on the development, qualification, implementation and acceptance of new product designs and improvements that provide value to our customers.
Our ability to develop, qualify and distribute new products and related technologies to meet evolving industry requirements, at prices acceptable to our customers and on a timely basis are significant factors in determining our competitiveness in our target markets.
For example, form factors have increasingly shifted from desktop PCs to mobile PCs, and tablets have been one of the fastest growing form factors.
Also, ARM-based processors are being used in mobile and embedded electronics products as relatively low cost and small microprocessors and also in form factors such as laptops, tablets and smartphones.
Historically, a significant portion of our Computing Solutions revenue has been related to desktop PCs.
Currently, approximately 85% of our business is focused on the legacy PC portions of the market, projected to have slowing growth over the next several years.
To the extent consumers adopt new form factors and have different requirements than those consumers in the PC market, PC sales could be negatively impacted, which could negatively impact our business.
If we fail to or are delayed in developing, qualifying or shipping new products or technologies that provide value to our customers and address these new trends, we may lose competitive positioning, which could cause us to lose market share and require us to discount the selling prices of our products.
Although we make substantial investments in research and development, we cannot be certain that we will be able to develop, obtain or successfully implement new products and technologies on a timely basis.
Delays in developing, qualifying or shipping new products can also cause us to miss our customers’ product design windows.
If our customers do not include our products in the initial design of their computer systems, they will typically not use our products in their systems until at least the next design configuration.
The process of being qualified for inclusion in a customer’s system can be lengthy and could cause us to further miss a cycle in the demand of end-users, which also could result in a loss of market share and harm our business.
Moreover, market demand requires that products incorporate new features and performance standards on an industry-wide basis.
The introduction of new products and enhancements to existing products is necessary to maintain an overall corporate average selling price.
If we are unable to introduce new products with sufficient increases in average selling price or increased unit sales volumes capable of offsetting the reductions in the average selling price of existing products, our business could be materially adversely affected.
Uncertain global economic conditions have in the past and may in the future adversely impact our business.
Uncertainty in the worldwide economic environment may negatively impact consumer confidence and spending causing our customers to postpone purchases.
For example, our revenue in the second half of 2012 was adversely affected, in part, by the overall weakness in the global economy and weak consumer demand for end-user PC products, which impacted sales.
We do not expect PC market conditions to improve during the first half of 2013.
In addition, during challenging economic times, our current or potential future customers may experience cash flow problems and as a result may modify, delay or cancel plans to purchase our products.
Additionally, if our customers are not successful in generating sufficient revenue or are unable to secure financing, they may not be able to pay, or may delay payment of, accounts receivable that they owe us.
Any inability of our current or potential future customers to pay us for our products may adversely affect our earnings and cash flow.
